III. The Watchman's Adventure

"Why, there is a pair of galoshes, as sure as I'm alive!" said the
watchman, awaking from a gentle slumber. "They belong no doubt to the
lieutenant who lives over the way. They lie close to the door."

The worthy man was inclined to ring and deliver them at the house, for
there was still a light in the window; but he did not like disturbing
the other people in their beds, and so very considerately he left the
matter alone.

"Such a pair of shoes must be very warm and comfortable," said he; "the
leather is so soft and supple." They fitted his feet as though they
had been made for him. "'Tis a curious world we live in," continued he,
soliloquizing. "There is the lieutenant, now, who might go quietly to
bed if he chose, where no doubt he could stretch himself at his ease;
but does he do it? No; he saunters up and down his room, because,
probably, he has enjoyed too many of the good things of this world at
his dinner. That's a happy fellow! He has neither an infirm mother, nor
a whole troop of everlastingly hungry children to torment him. Every
evening he goes to a party, where his nice supper costs him nothing:
would to Heaven I could but change with him! How happy should I be!"

While expressing his wish, the charm of the shoes, which he had put on,
began to work; the watchman entered into the being and nature of the
lieutenant. He stood in the handsomely furnished apartment, and held
between his fingers a small sheet of rose-colored paper, on which some
verses were written--written indeed by the officer himself; for who has
not, at least once in his life, had a lyrical moment? And if one then
marks down one's thoughts, poetry is produced. But here was written:

                  OH, WERE I RICH!

     "Oh, were I rich! Such was my wish, yea such
      When hardly three feet high, I longed for much.
       Oh, were I rich! an officer were I,
       With sword, and uniform, and plume so high.
       And the time came, and officer was I!
     But yet I grew not rich. Alas, poor me!
     Have pity, Thou, who all man's wants dost see.

        "I sat one evening sunk in dreams of bliss,
      A maid of seven years old gave me a kiss,
       I at that time was rich in poesy
       And tales of old, though poor as poor could be;
       But all she asked for was this poesy.
     Then was I rich, but not in gold, poor me!
     As Thou dost know, who all men's hearts canst see.

        "Oh, were I rich! Oft asked I for this boon.
      The child grew up to womanhood full soon.
       She is so pretty, clever, and so kind
     Oh, did she know what's hidden in my mind--
       A tale of old. Would she to me were kind!
     But I'm condemned to silence! oh, poor me!
     As Thou dost know, who all men's hearts canst see.

        "Oh, were I rich in calm and peace of mind,
      My grief you then would not here written find!
       O thou, to whom I do my heart devote,
       Oh read this page of glad days now remote,
       A dark, dark tale, which I tonight devote!
     Dark is the future now. Alas, poor me!
     Have pity Thou, who all men's pains dost see."

Such verses as these people write when they are in love! But no man
in his senses ever thinks of printing them. Here one of the sorrows of
life, in which there is real poetry, gave itself vent; not that
barren grief which the poet may only hint at, but never depict in its
detail--misery and want: that animal necessity, in short, to snatch
at least at a fallen leaf of the bread-fruit tree, if not at the fruit
itself. The higher the position in which one finds oneself transplanted,
the greater is the suffering. Everyday necessity is the stagnant pool of
life--no lovely picture reflects itself therein. Lieutenant, love, and
lack of money--that is a symbolic triangle, or much the same as the
half of the shattered die of Fortune. This the lieutenant felt most
poignantly, and this was the reason he leant his head against the
window, and sighed so deeply.

"The poor watchman out there in the street is far happier than I. He
knows not what I term privation. He has a home, a wife, and children,
who weep with him over his sorrows, who rejoice with him when he is
glad. Oh, far happier were I, could I exchange with him my being--with
his desires and with his hopes perform the weary pilgrimage of life! Oh,
he is a hundred times happier than I!"

In the same moment the watchman was again watchman. It was the shoes
that caused the metamorphosis by means of which, unknown to himself, he
took upon him the thoughts and feelings of the officer; but, as we have
just seen, he felt himself in his new situation much less contented,
and now preferred the very thing which but some minutes before he had
rejected. So then the watchman was again watchman.

"That was an unpleasant dream," said he; "but 'twas droll enough
altogether. I fancied that I was the lieutenant over there: and yet
the thing was not very much to my taste after all. I missed my good old
mother and the dear little ones; who almost tear me to pieces for sheer
love."

He seated himself once more and nodded: the dream continued to haunt
him, for he still had the shoes on his feet. A falling star shone in the
dark firmament.

"There falls another star," said he: "but what does it matter; there
are always enough left. I should not much mind examining the little
glimmering things somewhat nearer, especially the moon; for that would
not slip so easily through a man's fingers. When we die--so at least
says the student, for whom my wife does the washing--we shall fly about
as light as a feather from one such a star to the other. That's, of
course, not true: but 'twould be pretty enough if it were so. If I could
but once take a leap up there, my body might stay here on the steps for
what I care."

Behold--there are certain things in the world to which one ought never
to give utterance except with the greatest caution; but doubly careful
must one be when we have the Shoes of Fortune on our feet. Now just
listen to what happened to the watchman.

As to ourselves, we all know the speed produced by the employment of
steam; we have experienced it either on railroads, or in boats when
crossing the sea; but such a flight is like the travelling of a sloth in
comparison with the velocity with which light moves. It flies nineteen
million times faster than the best race-horse; and yet electricity is
quicker still. Death is an electric shock which our heart receives; the
freed soul soars upwards on the wings of electricity. The sun's light
wants eight minutes and some seconds to perform a journey of more than
twenty million of our Danish [*] miles; borne by electricity, the soul
wants even some minutes less to accomplish the same flight. To it the
space between the heavenly bodies is not greater than the distance
between the homes of our friends in town is for us, even if they live a
short way from each other; such an electric shock in the heart, however,
costs us the use of the body here below; unless, like the watchman of
East Street, we happen to have on the Shoes of Fortune.

     * A Danish mile is nearly 4 3/4 English.


In a few seconds the watchman had done the fifty-two thousand of our
miles up to the moon, which, as everyone knows, was formed out of
matter much lighter than our earth; and is, so we should say, as soft
as newly-fallen snow. He found himself on one of the many circumjacent
mountain-ridges with which we are acquainted by means of Dr. Madler's
"Map of the Moon." Within, down it sunk perpendicularly into a caldron,
about a Danish mile in depth; while below lay a town, whose appearance
we can, in some measure, realize to ourselves by beating the white of
an egg in a glass of water. The matter of which it was built was just as
soft, and formed similar towers, and domes, and pillars, transparent and
rocking in the thin air; while above his head our earth was rolling like
a large fiery ball.

He perceived immediately a quantity of beings who were certainly what
we call "men"; yet they looked different to us. A far more correct
imagination than that of the pseudo-Herschel* had created them; and
if they had been placed in rank and file, and copied by some skilful
painter's hand, one would, without doubt, have exclaimed involuntarily,
"What a beautiful arabesque!"

*This relates to a book published some years ago in Germany, and said
to be by Herschel, which contained a description of the moon and its
inhabitants, written with such a semblance of truth that many were
deceived by the imposture.

Probably a translation of the celebrated Moon hoax, written by Richard
A. Locke, and originally published in New York.


They had a language too; but surely nobody can expect that the soul of
the watchman should understand it. Be that as it may, it did comprehend
it; for in our souls there germinate far greater powers than we poor
mortals, despite all our cleverness, have any notion of. Does she
not show us--she the queen in the land of enchantment--her astounding
dramatic talent in all our dreams? There every acquaintance appears and
speaks upon the stage, so entirely in character, and with the same tone
of voice, that none of us, when awake, were able to imitate it. How
well can she recall persons to our mind, of whom we have not thought for
years; when suddenly they step forth "every inch a man," resembling the
real personages, even to the finest features, and become the heroes
or heroines of our world of dreams. In reality, such remembrances are
rather unpleasant: every sin, every evil thought, may, like a clock with
alarm or chimes, be repeated at pleasure; then the question is if we can
trust ourselves to give an account of every unbecoming word in our heart
and on our lips.

The watchman's spirit understood the language of the inhabitants of the
moon pretty well. The Selenites* disputed variously about our earth,
and expressed their doubts if it could be inhabited: the air, they said,
must certainly be too dense to allow any rational dweller in the moon
the necessary free respiration. They considered the moon alone to
be inhabited: they imagined it was the real heart of the universe or
planetary system, on which the genuine Cosmopolites, or citizens of the
world, dwelt. What strange things men--no, what strange things Selenites
sometimes take into their heads!

* Dwellers in the moon.


About politics they had a good deal to say. But little Denmark must
take care what it is about, and not run counter to the moon; that
great realm, that might in an ill-humor bestir itself, and dash down a
hail-storm in our faces, or force the Baltic to overflow the sides of
its gigantic basin.

We will, therefore, not listen to what was spoken, and on no condition
run in the possibility of telling tales out of school; but we will
rather proceed, like good quiet citizens, to East Street, and observe
what happened meanwhile to the body of the watchman.

He sat lifeless on the steps: the morning-star,* that is to say, the
heavy wooden staff, headed with iron spikes, and which had nothing else
in common with its sparkling brother in the sky, had glided from his
hand; while his eyes were fixed with glassy stare on the moon, looking
for the good old fellow of a spirit which still haunted it.

*The watchmen in Germany, had formerly, and in some places they still
carry with them, on their rounds at night, a sort of mace or club, known
in ancient times by the above denomination.


"What's the hour, watchman?" asked a passer-by. But when the watchman
gave no reply, the merry roysterer, who was now returning home from a
noisy drinking bout, took it into his head to try what a tweak of the
nose would do, on which the supposed sleeper lost his balance, the body
lay motionless, stretched out on the pavement: the man was dead. When
the patrol came up, all his comrades, who comprehended nothing of the
whole affair, were seized with a dreadful fright, for dead he was,
and he remained so. The proper authorities were informed of the
circumstance, people talked a good deal about it, and in the morning the
body was carried to the hospital.

Now that would be a very pretty joke, if the spirit when it came back
and looked for the body in East Street, were not to find one. No doubt
it would, in its anxiety, run off to the police, and then to the
"Hue and Cry" office, to announce that "the finder will be handsomely
rewarded," and at last away to the hospital; yet we may boldly assert
that the soul is shrewdest when it shakes off every fetter, and every
sort of leading-string--the body only makes it stupid.

The seemingly dead body of the watchman wandered, as we have said, to
the hospital, where it was brought into the general viewing-room:
and the first thing that was done here was naturally to pull off the
galoshes--when the spirit, that was merely gone out on adventures, must
have returned with the quickness of lightning to its earthly tenement.
It took its direction towards the body in a straight line; and a few
seconds after, life began to show itself in the man. He asserted that
the preceding night had been the worst that ever the malice of fate had
allotted him; he would not for two silver marks again go through what he
had endured while moon-stricken; but now, however, it was over.

The same day he was discharged from the hospital as perfectly cured; but
the Shoes meanwhile remained behind.


IV. A Moment of Head Importance--An Evening's "Dramatic Readings"--A
Most Strange Journey

Every inhabitant of Copenhagen knows, from personal inspection, how
the entrance to Frederick's Hospital looks; but as it is possible that
others, who are not Copenhagen people, may also read this little work,
we will beforehand give a short description of it.

The extensive building is separated from the street by a pretty high
railing, the thick iron bars of which are so far apart, that in
all seriousness, it is said, some very thin fellow had of a night
occasionally squeezed himself through to go and pay his little visits
in the town. The part of the body most difficult to manage on such
occasions was, no doubt, the head; here, as is so often the case in
the world, long-headed people get through best. So much, then, for the
introduction.

One of the young men, whose head, in a physical sense only, might be
said to be of the thickest, had the watch that evening. The rain poured
down in torrents; yet despite these two obstacles, the young man was
obliged to go out, if it were but for a quarter of an hour; and as
to telling the door-keeper about it, that, he thought, was quite
unnecessary, if, with a whole skin, he were able to slip through the
railings. There, on the floor lay the galoshes, which the watchman
had forgotten; he never dreamed for a moment that they were those of
Fortune; and they promised to do him good service in the wet; so he put
them on. The question now was, if he could squeeze himself through the
grating, for he had never tried before. Well, there he stood.

"Would to Heaven I had got my head through!" said he, involuntarily; and
instantly through it slipped, easily and without pain, notwithstanding
it was pretty large and thick. But now the rest of the body was to be
got through!

"Ah! I am much too stout," groaned he aloud, while fixed as in a vice.
"I had thought the head was the most difficult part of the matter--oh!
oh! I really cannot squeeze myself through!"

He now wanted to pull his over-hasty head back again, but he could not.
For his neck there was room enough, but for nothing more. His first
feeling was of anger; his next that his temper fell to zero. The
Shoes of Fortune had placed him in the most dreadful situation; and,
unfortunately, it never occurred to him to wish himself free. The
pitch-black clouds poured down their contents in still heavier torrents;
not a creature was to be seen in the streets. To reach up to the bell
was what he did not like; to cry aloud for help would have availed him
little; besides, how ashamed would he have been to be found caught in a
trap, like an outwitted fox! How was he to twist himself through! He saw
clearly that it was his irrevocable destiny to remain a prisoner till
dawn, or, perhaps, even late in the morning; then the smith must be
fetched to file away the bars; but all that would not be done so quickly
as he could think about it. The whole Charity School, just opposite,
would be in motion; all the new booths, with their not very
courtier-like swarm of seamen, would join them out of curiosity, and
would greet him with a wild "hurrah!" while he was standing in his
pillory: there would be a mob, a hissing, and rejoicing, and jeering,
ten times worse than in the rows about the Jews some years ago--"Oh, my
blood is mounting to my brain; 'tis enough to drive one mad! I shall go
wild! I know not what to do. Oh! were I but loose; my dizziness would
then cease; oh, were my head but loose!"

You see he ought to have said that sooner; for the moment he expressed
the wish his head was free; and cured of all his paroxysms of love, he
hastened off to his room, where the pains consequent on the fright the
Shoes had prepared for him, did not so soon take their leave.

But you must not think that the affair is over now; it grows much worse.

The night passed, the next day also; but nobody came to fetch the Shoes.

In the evening "Dramatic Readings" were to be given at the little
theatre in King Street. The house was filled to suffocation; and among
other pieces to be recited was a new poem by H. C. Andersen, called, My
Aunt's Spectacles; the contents of which were pretty nearly as follows:

"A certain person had an aunt, who boasted of particular skill in
fortune-telling with cards, and who was constantly being stormed by
persons that wanted to have a peep into futurity. But she was full of
mystery about her art, in which a certain pair of magic spectacles
did her essential service. Her nephew, a merry boy, who was his aunt's
darling, begged so long for these spectacles, that, at last, she lent
him the treasure, after having informed him, with many exhortations,
that in order to execute the interesting trick, he need only repair to
some place where a great many persons were assembled; and then, from a
higher position, whence he could overlook the crowd, pass the company in
review before him through his spectacles. Immediately 'the inner man' of
each individual would be displayed before him, like a game of cards, in
which he unerringly might read what the future of every person presented
was to be. Well pleased the little magician hastened away to prove the
powers of the spectacles in the theatre; no place seeming to him more
fitted for such a trial. He begged permission of the worthy audience,
and set his spectacles on his nose. A motley phantasmagoria presents
itself before him, which he describes in a few satirical touches, yet
without expressing his opinion openly: he tells the people enough to set
them all thinking and guessing; but in order to hurt nobody, he wraps
his witty oracular judgments in a transparent veil, or rather in a lurid
thundercloud, shooting forth bright sparks of wit, that they may fall in
the powder-magazine of the expectant audience."

The humorous poem was admirably recited, and the speaker much applauded.
Among the audience was the young man of the hospital, who seemed to have
forgotten his adventure of the preceding night. He had on the Shoes; for
as yet no lawful owner had appeared to claim them; and besides it was so
very dirty out-of-doors, they were just the thing for him, he thought.

The beginning of the poem he praised with great generosity: he even
found the idea original and effective. But that the end of it, like the
Rhine, was very insignificant, proved, in his opinion, the author's
want of invention; he was without genius, etc. This was an excellent
opportunity to have said something clever.

Meanwhile he was haunted by the idea--he should like to possess such a
pair of spectacles himself; then, perhaps, by using them circumspectly,
one would be able to look into people's hearts, which, he thought, would
be far more interesting than merely to see what was to happen next year;
for that we should all know in proper time, but the other never.

"I can now," said he to himself, "fancy the whole row of ladies and
gentlemen sitting there in the front row; if one could but see into
their hearts--yes, that would be a revelation--a sort of bazar. In that
lady yonder, so strangely dressed, I should find for certain a large
milliner's shop; in that one the shop is empty, but it wants cleaning
plain enough. But there would also be some good stately shops among
them. Alas!" sighed he, "I know one in which all is stately; but there
sits already a spruce young shopman, which is the only thing that's
amiss in the whole shop. All would be splendidly decked out, and we
should hear, 'Walk in, gentlemen, pray walk in; here you will find all
you please to want.' Ah! I wish to Heaven I could walk in and take a
trip right through the hearts of those present!"

And behold! to the Shoes of Fortune this was the cue; the whole man
shrunk together and a most uncommon journey through the hearts of the
front row of spectators, now began. The first heart through which he
came, was that of a middle-aged lady, but he instantly fancied himself
in the room of the "Institution for the cure of the crooked and
deformed," where casts of mis-shapen limbs are displayed in naked
reality on the wall. Yet there was this difference, in the institution
the casts were taken at the entry of the patient; but here they were
retained and guarded in the heart while the sound persons went away.
They were, namely, casts of female friends, whose bodily or mental
deformities were here most faithfully preserved.

With the snake-like writhings of an idea he glided into another female
heart; but this seemed to him like a large holy fane. [*] The white dove of
innocence fluttered over the altar. How gladly would he have sunk upon
his knees; but he must away to the next heart; yet he still heard the
pealing tones of the organ, and he himself seemed to have become a newer
and a better man; he felt unworthy to tread the neighboring sanctuary
which a poor garret, with a sick bed-rid mother, revealed. But God's
warm sun streamed through the open window; lovely roses nodded from
the wooden flower-boxes on the roof, and two sky-blue birds sang
rejoicingly, while the sick mother implored God's richest blessings on
her pious daughter.

     * temple


He now crept on hands and feet through a butcher's shop; at least on
every side, and above and below, there was nought but flesh. It was the
heart of a most respectable rich man, whose name is certain to be found
in the Directory.

He was now in the heart of the wife of this worthy gentleman. It was an
old, dilapidated, mouldering dovecot. The husband's portrait was used as
a weather-cock, which was connected in some way or other with the doors,
and so they opened and shut of their own accord, whenever the stern old
husband turned round.

Hereupon he wandered into a boudoir formed entirely of mirrors, like
the one in Castle Rosenburg; but here the glasses magnified to an
astonishing degree. On the floor, in the middle of the room, sat, like a
Dalai-Lama, the insignificant "Self" of the person, quite confounded at
his own greatness. He then imagined he had got into a needle-case full
of pointed needles of every size.

"This is certainly the heart of an old maid," thought he. But he was
mistaken. It was the heart of a young military man; a man, as people
said, of talent and feeling.

In the greatest perplexity, he now came out of the last heart in the
row; he was unable to put his thoughts in order, and fancied that his
too lively imagination had run away with him.

"Good Heavens!" sighed he. "I have surely a disposition to madness--'tis
dreadfully hot here; my blood boils in my veins and my head is burning
like a coal." And he now remembered the important event of the evening
before, how his head had got jammed in between the iron railings of the
hospital. "That's what it is, no doubt," said he. "I must do something
in time: under such circumstances a Russian bath might do me good. I
only wish I were already on the upper bank." [*]

     *In these Russian (vapor) baths the person extends himself
     on a bank or form, and as he gets accustomed to the heat,
     moves to another higher up towards the ceiling, where, of
     course, the vapor is warmest. In this manner he ascends
     gradually to the highest.

And so there he lay on the uppermost bank in the vapor-bath; but with
all his clothes on, in his boots and galoshes, while the hot drops fell
scalding from the ceiling on his face.

"Holloa!" cried he, leaping down. The bathing attendant, on his side,
uttered a loud cry of astonishment when he beheld in the bath, a man
completely dressed.

The other, however, retained sufficient presence of mind to whisper to
him, "'Tis a bet, and I have won it!" But the first thing he did as soon
as he got home, was to have a large blister put on his chest and back to
draw out his madness.

The next morning he had a sore chest and a bleeding back; and, excepting
the fright, that was all that he had gained by the Shoes of Fortune.


V. Metamorphosis of the Copying-Clerk

The watchman, whom we have certainly not forgotten, thought meanwhile
of the galoshes he had found and taken with him to the hospital; he now
went to fetch them; and as neither the lieutenant, nor anybody else in
the street, claimed them as his property, they were delivered over to
the police-office.*

*As on the continent, in all law and police practices nothing is verbal,
but any circumstance, however trifling, is reduced to writing, the
labor, as well as the number of papers that thus accumulate, is
enormous. In a police-office, consequently, we find copying-clerks among
many other scribes of various denominations, of which, it seems, our
hero was one.


"Why, I declare the Shoes look just like my own," said one of the
clerks, eying the newly-found treasure, whose hidden powers, even he,
sharp as he was, was not able to discover. "One must have more than
the eye of a shoemaker to know one pair from the other," said he,
soliloquizing; and putting, at the same time, the galoshes in search of
an owner, beside his own in the corner.

"Here, sir!" said one of the men, who panting brought him a tremendous
pile of papers.

The copying-clerk turned round and spoke awhile with the man about the
reports and legal documents in question; but when he had finished, and
his eye fell again on the Shoes, he was unable to say whether those to
the left or those to the right belonged to him. "At all events it must
be those which are wet," thought he; but this time, in spite of his
cleverness, he guessed quite wrong, for it was just those of Fortune
which played as it were into his hands, or rather on his feet. And why,
I should like to know, are the police never to be wrong? So he put them
on quickly, stuck his papers in his pocket, and took besides a few under
his arm, intending to look them through at home to make the necessary
notes. It was noon; and the weather, that had threatened rain, began
to clear up, while gaily dressed holiday folks filled the streets. "A
little trip to Fredericksburg would do me no great harm," thought he;
"for I, poor beast of burden that I am, have so much to annoy me, that I
don't know what a good appetite is. 'Tis a bitter crust, alas! at which
I am condemned to gnaw!"

Nobody could be more steady or quiet than this young man; we therefore
wish him joy of the excursion with all our heart; and it will certainly
be beneficial for a person who leads so sedentary a life. In the park
he met a friend, one of our young poets, who told him that the following
day he should set out on his long-intended tour.

"So you are going away again!" said the clerk. "You are a very free
and happy being; we others are chained by the leg and held fast to our
desk."

"Yes; but it is a chain, friend, which ensures you the blessed bread
of existence," answered the poet. "You need feel no care for the coming
morrow: when you are old, you receive a pension."

"True," said the clerk, shrugging his shoulders; "and yet you are
the better off. To sit at one's ease and poetise--that is a pleasure;
everybody has something agreeable to say to you, and you are always your
own master. No, friend, you should but try what it is to sit from one
year's end to the other occupied with and judging the most trivial
matters."

The poet shook his head, the copying-clerk did the same. Each one kept
to his own opinion, and so they separated.

"It's a strange race, those poets!" said the clerk, who was very fond of
soliloquizing. "I should like some day, just for a trial, to take such
nature upon me, and be a poet myself; I am very sure I should make
no such miserable verses as the others. Today, methinks, is a most
delicious day for a poet. Nature seems anew to celebrate her awakening
into life. The air is so unusually clear, the clouds sail on so
buoyantly, and from the green herbage a fragrance is exhaled that fills
me with delight. For many a year have I not felt as at this moment."

We see already, by the foregoing effusion, that he is become a poet; to
give further proof of it, however, would in most cases be insipid, for
it is a most foolish notion to fancy a poet different from other men.
Among the latter there may be far more poetical natures than many an
acknowledged poet, when examined more closely, could boast of; the
difference only is, that the poet possesses a better mental memory, on
which account he is able to retain the feeling and the thought till they
can be embodied by means of words; a faculty which the others do not
possess. But the transition from a commonplace nature to one that is
richly endowed, demands always a more or less breakneck leap over a
certain abyss which yawns threateningly below; and thus must the sudden
change with the clerk strike the reader.

"The sweet air!" continued he of the police-office, in his dreamy
imaginings; "how it reminds me of the violets in the garden of my aunt
Magdalena! Yes, then I was a little wild boy, who did not go to school
very regularly. O heavens! 'tis a long time since I have thought on
those times. The good old soul! She lived behind the Exchange. She
always had a few twigs or green shoots in water--let the winter rage
without as it might. The violets exhaled their sweet breath, whilst I
pressed against the windowpanes covered with fantastic frost-work the
copper coin I had heated on the stove, and so made peep-holes.
What splendid vistas were then opened to my view! What change--what
magnificence! Yonder in the canal lay the ships frozen up, and deserted
by their whole crews, with a screaming crow for the sole occupant. But
when the spring, with a gentle stirring motion, announced her arrival,
a new and busy life arose; with songs and hurrahs the ice was sawn
asunder, the ships were fresh tarred and rigged, that they might sail
away to distant lands. But I have remained here--must always remain
here, sitting at my desk in the office, and patiently see other people
fetch their passports to go abroad. Such is my fate! Alas!"--sighed he,
and was again silent. "Great Heaven! What is come to me! Never have I
thought or felt like this before! It must be the summer air that affects
me with feelings almost as disquieting as they are refreshing."

He felt in his pocket for the papers. "These police-reports will soon
stem the torrent of my ideas, and effectually hinder any rebellious
overflowing of the time-worn banks of official duties"; he said to
himself consolingly, while his eye ran over the first page. "DAME
TIGBRITH, tragedy in five acts." "What is that? And yet it is undeniably
my own handwriting. Have I written the tragedy? Wonderful, very
wonderful!--And this--what have I here? 'INTRIGUE ON THE RAMPARTS; or
THE DAY OF REPENTANCE: vaudeville with new songs to the most favorite
airs.' The deuce! Where did I get all this rubbish? Some one must have
slipped it slyly into my pocket for a joke. There is too a letter to me;
a crumpled letter and the seal broken."

Yes; it was not a very polite epistle from the manager of a theatre, in
which both pieces were flatly refused.

"Hem! hem!" said the clerk breathlessly, and quite exhausted he seated
himself on a bank. His thoughts were so elastic, his heart so tender;
and involuntarily he picked one of the nearest flowers. It is a simple
daisy, just bursting out of the bud. What the botanist tells us after
a number of imperfect lectures, the flower proclaimed in a minute. It
related the mythus of its birth, told of the power of the sun-light that
spread out its delicate leaves, and forced them to impregnate the air
with their incense--and then he thought of the manifold struggles of
life, which in like manner awaken the budding flowers of feeling in our
bosom. Light and air contend with chivalric emulation for the love of
the fair flower that bestowed her chief favors on the latter; full of
longing she turned towards the light, and as soon as it vanished, rolled
her tender leaves together and slept in the embraces of the air. "It is
the light which adorns me," said the flower.

"But 'tis the air which enables thee to breathe," said the poet's voice.

Close by stood a boy who dashed his stick into a wet ditch. The drops of
water splashed up to the green leafy roof, and the clerk thought of the
million of ephemera which in a single drop were thrown up to a height,
that was as great doubtless for their size, as for us if we were to
be hurled above the clouds. While he thought of this and of the whole
metamorphosis he had undergone, he smiled and said, "I sleep and dream;
but it is wonderful how one can dream so naturally, and know besides so
exactly that it is but a dream. If only to-morrow on awaking, I could
again call all to mind so vividly! I seem in unusually good spirits; my
perception of things is clear, I feel as light and cheerful as though
I were in heaven; but I know for a certainty, that if to-morrow a dim
remembrance of it should swim before my mind, it will then seem nothing
but stupid nonsense, as I have often experienced already--especially
before I enlisted under the banner of the police, for that dispels like
a whirlwind all the visions of an unfettered imagination. All we hear
or say in a dream that is fair and beautiful is like the gold of the
subterranean spirits; it is rich and splendid when it is given us, but
viewed by daylight we find only withered leaves. Alas!" he sighed quite
sorrowful, and gazed at the chirping birds that hopped contentedly from
branch to branch, "they are much better off than I! To fly must be a
heavenly art; and happy do I prize that creature in which it is innate.
Yes! Could I exchange my nature with any other creature, I fain would be
such a happy little lark!"

He had hardly uttered these hasty words when the skirts and sleeves
of his coat folded themselves together into wings; the clothes became
feathers, and the galoshes claws. He observed it perfectly, and laughed
in his heart. "Now then, there is no doubt that I am dreaming; but I
never before was aware of such mad freaks as these." And up he flew into
the green roof and sang; but in the song there was no poetry, for the
spirit of the poet was gone. The Shoes, as is the case with anybody who
does what he has to do properly, could only attend to one thing at a
time. He wanted to be a poet, and he was one; he now wished to be a
merry chirping bird: but when he was metamorphosed into one, the former
peculiarities ceased immediately. "It is really pleasant enough," said
he: "the whole day long I sit in the office amid the driest
law-papers, and at night I fly in my dream as a lark in the gardens of
Fredericksburg; one might really write a very pretty comedy upon it." He
now fluttered down into the grass, turned his head gracefully on every
side, and with his bill pecked the pliant blades of grass, which, in
comparison to his present size, seemed as majestic as the palm-branches
of northern Africa.

Unfortunately the pleasure lasted but a moment. Presently black night
overshadowed our enthusiast, who had so entirely missed his part of
copying-clerk at a police-office; some vast object seemed to be thrown
over him. It was a large oil-skin cap, which a sailor-boy of the quay
had thrown over the struggling bird; a coarse hand sought its way
carefully in under the broad rim, and seized the clerk over the back
and wings. In the first moment of fear, he called, indeed, as loud as
he could--"You impudent little blackguard! I am a copying-clerk at
the police-office; and you know you cannot insult any belonging to the
constabulary force without a chastisement. Besides, you good-for-nothing
rascal, it is strictly forbidden to catch birds in the royal gardens of
Fredericksburg; but your blue uniform betrays where you come from."
 This fine tirade sounded, however, to the ungodly sailor-boy like a mere
"Pippi-pi." He gave the noisy bird a knock on his beak, and walked on.

He was soon met by two schoolboys of the upper class--that is to say as
individuals, for with regard to learning they were in the lowest class
in the school; and they bought the stupid bird. So the copying-clerk
came to Copenhagen as guest, or rather as prisoner in a family living in
Gother Street.

"'Tis well that I'm dreaming," said the clerk, "or I really should get
angry. First I was a poet; now sold for a few pence as a lark; no doubt
it was that accursed poetical nature which has metamorphosed me
into such a poor harmless little creature. It is really pitiable,
particularly when one gets into the hands of a little blackguard,
perfect in all sorts of cruelty to animals: all I should like to know
is, how the story will end."

The two schoolboys, the proprietors now of the transformed clerk,
carried him into an elegant room. A stout stately dame received them
with a smile; but she expressed much dissatisfaction that a common
field-bird, as she called the lark, should appear in such high society.
For to-day, however, she would allow it; and they must shut him in the
empty cage that was standing in the window. "Perhaps he will amuse my
good Polly," added the lady, looking with a benignant smile at a large
green parrot that swung himself backwards and forwards most comfortably
in his ring, inside a magnificent brass-wired cage. "To-day is Polly's
birthday," said she with stupid simplicity: "and the little brown
field-bird must wish him joy."

Mr. Polly uttered not a syllable in reply, but swung to and fro with
dignified condescension; while a pretty canary, as yellow as gold, that
had lately been brought from his sunny fragrant home, began to sing
aloud.

"Noisy creature! Will you be quiet!" screamed the lady of the house,
covering the cage with an embroidered white pocket handkerchief.

"Chirp, chirp!" sighed he. "That was a dreadful snowstorm"; and he
sighed again, and was silent.

The copying-clerk, or, as the lady said, the brown field-bird, was
put into a small cage, close to the Canary, and not far from "my good
Polly." The only human sounds that the Parrot could bawl out
were, "Come, let us be men!" Everything else that he said was as
unintelligible to everybody as the chirping of the Canary, except to the
clerk, who was now a bird too: he understood his companion perfectly.

"I flew about beneath the green palms and the blossoming almond-trees,"
 sang the Canary; "I flew around, with my brothers and sisters, over
the beautiful flowers, and over the glassy lakes, where the bright
water-plants nodded to me from below. There, too, I saw many
splendidly-dressed paroquets, that told the drollest stories, and the
wildest fairy tales without end."

"Oh! those were uncouth birds," answered the Parrot. "They had no
education, and talked of whatever came into their head.

"If my mistress and all her friends can laugh at what I say, so may you
too, I should think. It is a great fault to have no taste for what is
witty or amusing--come, let us be men."

"Ah, you have no remembrance of love for the charming maidens that
danced beneath the outspread tents beside the bright fragrant flowers?
Do you no longer remember the sweet fruits, and the cooling juice in
the wild plants of our never-to-be-forgotten home?" said the former
inhabitant of the Canary Isles, continuing his dithyrambic.

"Oh, yes," said the Parrot; "but I am far better off here. I am well
fed, and get friendly treatment. I know I am a clever fellow; and that
is all I care about. Come, let us be men. You are of a poetical nature,
as it is called--I, on the contrary, possess profound knowledge and
inexhaustible wit. You have genius; but clear-sighted, calm discretion
does not take such lofty flights, and utter such high natural tones.
For this they have covered you over--they never do the like to me; for
I cost more. Besides, they are afraid of my beak; and I have always a
witty answer at hand. Come, let us be men!"

"O warm spicy land of my birth," sang the Canary bird; "I will sing of
thy dark-green bowers, of the calm bays where the pendent boughs
kiss the surface of the water; I will sing of the rejoicing of all my
brothers and sisters where the cactus grows in wanton luxuriance."

"Spare us your elegiac tones," said the Parrot giggling. "Rather speak
of something at which one may laugh heartily. Laughing is an infallible
sign of the highest degree of mental development. Can a dog, or a horse
laugh? No, but they can cry. The gift of laughing was given to man
alone. Ha! ha! ha!" screamed Polly, and added his stereotype witticism.
"Come, let us be men!"

"Poor little Danish grey-bird," said the Canary; "you have been caught
too. It is, no doubt, cold enough in your woods, but there at least
is the breath of liberty; therefore fly away. In the hurry they have
forgotten to shut your cage, and the upper window is open. Fly, my
friend; fly away. Farewell!"

Instinctively the Clerk obeyed; with a few strokes of his wings he was
out of the cage; but at the same moment the door, which was only ajar,
and which led to the next room, began to creak, and supple and creeping
came the large tomcat into the room, and began to pursue him. The
frightened Canary fluttered about in his cage; the Parrot flapped his
wings, and cried, "Come, let us be men!" The Clerk felt a mortal fright,
and flew through the window, far away over the houses and streets. At
last he was forced to rest a little.

The neighboring house had a something familiar about it; a window stood
open; he flew in; it was his own room. He perched upon the table.

"Come, let us be men!" said he, involuntarily imitating the chatter of
the Parrot, and at the same moment he was again a copying-clerk; but he
was sitting in the middle of the table.

"Heaven help me!" cried he. "How did I get up here--and so buried in
sleep, too? After all, that was a very unpleasant, disagreeable dream
that haunted me! The whole story is nothing but silly, stupid nonsense!"


VI. The Best That the Galoshes Gave

The following day, early in the morning, while the Clerk was still in
bed, someone knocked at his door. It was his neighbor, a young Divine,
who lived on the same floor. He walked in.

"Lend me your Galoshes," said he; "it is so wet in the garden, though
the sun is shining most invitingly. I should like to go out a little."

He got the Galoshes, and he was soon below in a little duodecimo garden,
where between two immense walls a plumtree and an apple-tree were
standing. Even such a little garden as this was considered in the
metropolis of Copenhagen as a great luxury.

The young man wandered up and down the narrow paths, as well as the
prescribed limits would allow; the clock struck six; without was heard
the horn of a post-boy.

"To travel! to travel!" exclaimed he, overcome by most painful and
passionate remembrances. "That is the happiest thing in the world! That
is the highest aim of all my wishes! Then at last would the agonizing
restlessness be allayed, which destroys my existence! But it must be
far, far away! I would behold magnificent Switzerland; I would travel to
Italy, and--"

It was a good thing that the power of the Galoshes worked as
instantaneously as lightning in a powder-magazine would do, otherwise
the poor man with his overstrained wishes would have travelled about
the world too much for himself as well as for us. In short, he was
travelling. He was in the middle of Switzerland, but packed up with
eight other passengers in the inside of an eternally-creaking diligence;
his head ached till it almost split, his weary neck could hardly bear
the heavy load, and his feet, pinched by his torturing boots, were
terribly swollen. He was in an intermediate state between sleeping and
waking; at variance with himself, with his company, with the country,
and with the government. In his right pocket he had his letter of
credit, in the left, his passport, and in a small leathern purse some
double louis d'or, carefully sewn up in the bosom of his waistcoat.
Every dream proclaimed that one or the other of these valuables was
lost; wherefore he started up as in a fever; and the first movement
which his hand made, described a magic triangle from the right pocket to
the left, and then up towards the bosom, to feel if he had them all safe
or not. From the roof inside the carriage, umbrellas, walking-sticks,
hats, and sundry other articles were depending, and hindered the view,
which was particularly imposing. He now endeavored as well as he
was able to dispel his gloom, which was caused by outward chance
circumstances merely, and on the bosom of nature imbibe the milk of
purest human enjoyment.

Grand, solemn, and dark was the whole landscape around. The gigantic
pine-forests, on the pointed crags, seemed almost like little tufts of
heather, colored by the surrounding clouds. It began to snow, a cold
wind blew and roared as though it were seeking a bride.

"Augh!" sighed he, "were we only on the other side the Alps, then we
should have summer, and I could get my letters of credit cashed. The
anxiety I feel about them prevents me enjoying Switzerland. Were I but
on the other side!"

And so saying he was on the other side in Italy, between Florence and
Rome. Lake Thracymene, illumined by the evening sun, lay like flaming
gold between the dark-blue mountain-ridges; here, where Hannibal
defeated Flaminius, the rivers now held each other in their green
embraces; lovely, half-naked children tended a herd of black swine,
beneath a group of fragrant laurel-trees, hard by the road-side.
Could we render this inimitable picture properly, then would everybody
exclaim, "Beautiful, unparalleled Italy!" But neither the young Divine
said so, nor anyone of his grumbling companions in the coach of the
vetturino.

The poisonous flies and gnats swarmed around by thousands; in vain one
waved myrtle-branches about like mad; the audacious insect population
did not cease to sting; nor was there a single person in the
well-crammed carriage whose face was not swollen and sore from their
ravenous bites. The poor horses, tortured almost to death, suffered most
from this truly Egyptian plague; the flies alighted upon them in large
disgusting swarms; and if the coachman got down and scraped them off,
hardly a minute elapsed before they were there again. The sun now set: a
freezing cold, though of short duration pervaded the whole creation;
it was like a horrid gust coming from a burial-vault on a warm summer's
day--but all around the mountains retained that wonderful green tone
which we see in some old pictures, and which, should we not have seen a
similar play of color in the South, we declare at once to be unnatural.
It was a glorious prospect; but the stomach was empty, the body tired;
all that the heart cared and longed for was good night-quarters; yet
how would they be? For these one looked much more anxiously than for the
charms of nature, which every where were so profusely displayed.

The road led through an olive-grove, and here the solitary inn was
situated. Ten or twelve crippled-beggars had encamped outside. The
healthiest of them resembled, to use an expression of Marryat's,
"Hunger's eldest son when he had come of age"; the others were either
blind, had withered legs and crept about on their hands, or withered
arms and fingerless hands. It was the most wretched misery, dragged
from among the filthiest rags. "Excellenza, miserabili!" sighed they,
thrusting forth their deformed limbs to view. Even the hostess, with
bare feet, uncombed hair, and dressed in a garment of doubtful color,
received the guests grumblingly. The doors were fastened with a loop of
string; the floor of the rooms presented a stone paving half torn
up; bats fluttered wildly about the ceiling; and as to the smell
therein--no--that was beyond description.

"You had better lay the cloth below in the stable," said one of the
travellers; "there, at all events, one knows what one is breathing."

The windows were quickly opened, to let in a little fresh air. Quicker,
however, than the breeze, the withered, sallow arms of the beggars were
thrust in, accompanied by the eternal whine of "Miserabili, miserabili,
excellenza!" On the walls were displayed innumerable inscriptions,
written in nearly every language of Europe, some in verse, some in
prose, most of them not very laudatory of "bella Italia."

The meal was served. It consisted of a soup of salted water, seasoned
with pepper and rancid oil. The last ingredient played a very prominent
part in the salad; stale eggs and roasted cocks'-combs furnished the
grand dish of the repast; the wine even was not without a disgusting
taste--it was like a medicinal draught.

At night the boxes and other effects of the passengers were placed
against the rickety doors. One of the travellers kept watch while the
others slept. The sentry was our young Divine. How close it was in the
chamber! The heat oppressive to suffocation--the gnats hummed and stung
unceasingly--the "miserabili" without whined and moaned in their sleep.

"Travelling would be agreeable enough," said he groaning, "if one only
had no body, or could send it to rest while the spirit went on its
pilgrimage unhindered, whither the voice within might call it. Wherever
I go, I am pursued by a longing that is insatiable--that I cannot
explain to myself, and that tears my very heart. I want something better
than what is but what is fled in an instant. But what is it, and where
is it to be found? Yet, I know in reality what it is I wish for. Oh!
most happy were I, could I but reach one aim--could but reach the
happiest of all!"

And as he spoke the word he was again in his home; the long white
curtains hung down from the windows, and in the middle of the floor
stood the black coffin; in it he lay in the sleep of death. His wish
was fulfilled--the body rested, while the spirit went unhindered on its
pilgrimage. "Let no one deem himself happy before his end," were the
words of Solon; and here was a new and brilliant proof of the wisdom of
the old apothegm.

Every corpse is a sphynx of immortality; here too on the black coffin
the sphynx gave us no answer to what he who lay within had written two
days before:

     "O mighty Death! thy silence teaches nought,
       Thou leadest only to the near grave's brink;
      Is broken now the ladder of my thoughts?
     Do I instead of mounting only sink?

     Our heaviest grief the world oft seeth not,
      Our sorest pain we hide from stranger eyes:
      And for the sufferer there is nothing left
     But the green mound that o'er the coffin lies."

Two figures were moving in the chamber. We knew them both; it was the
fairy of Care, and the emissary of Fortune. They both bent over the
corpse.

"Do you now see," said Care, "what happiness your Galoshes have brought
to mankind?"

"To him, at least, who slumbers here, they have brought an imperishable
blessing," answered the other.

"Ah no!" replied Care. "He took his departure himself; he was not called
away. His mental powers here below were not strong enough to reach the
treasures lying beyond this life, and which his destiny ordained he
should obtain. I will now confer a benefit on him."

And she took the Galoshes from his feet; his sleep of death was ended;
and he who had been thus called back again to life arose from his
dread couch in all the vigor of youth. Care vanished, and with her the
Galoshes. She has no doubt taken them for herself, to keep them to all
eternity.




THE FIR TREE

Out in the woods stood a nice little Fir Tree. The place he had was a
very good one: the sun shone on him: as to fresh air, there was enough
of that, and round him grew many large-sized comrades, pines as well as
firs. But the little Fir wanted so very much to be a grown-up tree.

He did not think of the warm sun and of the fresh air; he did not care
for the little cottage children that ran about and prattled when they
were in the woods looking for wild-strawberries. The children often came
with a whole pitcher full of berries, or a long row of them threaded on
a straw, and sat down near the young tree and said, "Oh, how pretty he
is! What a nice little fir!" But this was what the Tree could not bear
to hear.

At the end of a year he had shot up a good deal, and after another year
he was another long bit taller; for with fir trees one can always tell
by the shoots how many years old they are.

"Oh! Were I but such a high tree as the others are," sighed he. "Then I
should be able to spread out my branches, and with the tops to look into
the wide world! Then would the birds build nests among my branches: and
when there was a breeze, I could bend with as much stateliness as the
others!"

Neither the sunbeams, nor the birds, nor the red clouds which morning
and evening sailed above him, gave the little Tree any pleasure.

In winter, when the snow lay glittering on the ground, a hare would
often come leaping along, and jump right over the little Tree. Oh, that
made him so angry! But two winters were past, and in the third the Tree
was so large that the hare was obliged to go round it. "To grow and
grow, to get older and be tall," thought the Tree--"that, after all, is
the most delightful thing in the world!"

In autumn the wood-cutters always came and felled some of the largest
trees. This happened every year; and the young Fir Tree, that had now
grown to a very comely size, trembled at the sight; for the magnificent
great trees fell to the earth with noise and cracking, the branches were
lopped off, and the trees looked long and bare; they were hardly to be
recognised; and then they were laid in carts, and the horses dragged
them out of the wood.

Where did they go to? What became of them?

In spring, when the swallows and the storks came, the Tree asked them,
"Don't you know where they have been taken? Have you not met them
anywhere?"

The swallows did not know anything about it; but the Stork looked
musing, nodded his head, and said, "Yes; I think I know; I met many
ships as I was flying hither from Egypt; on the ships were magnificent
masts, and I venture to assert that it was they that smelt so of fir.
I may congratulate you, for they lifted themselves on high most
majestically!"

"Oh, were I but old enough to fly across the sea! But how does the sea
look in reality? What is it like?"

"That would take a long time to explain," said the Stork, and with these
words off he went.

"Rejoice in thy growth!" said the Sunbeams. "Rejoice in thy vigorous
growth, and in the fresh life that moveth within thee!"

And the Wind kissed the Tree, and the Dew wept tears over him; but the
Fir understood it not.

When Christmas came, quite young trees were cut down: trees which often
were not even as large or of the same age as this Fir Tree, who could
never rest, but always wanted to be off. These young trees, and they
were always the finest looking, retained their branches; they were laid
on carts, and the horses drew them out of the wood.

"Where are they going to?" asked the Fir. "They are not taller than
I; there was one indeed that was considerably shorter; and why do they
retain all their branches? Whither are they taken?"

"We know! We know!" chirped the Sparrows. "We have peeped in at the
windows in the town below! We know whither they are taken! The greatest
splendor and the greatest magnificence one can imagine await them. We
peeped through the windows, and saw them planted in the middle of the
warm room and ornamented with the most splendid things, with gilded
apples, with gingerbread, with toys, and many hundred lights!"

"And then?" asked the Fir Tree, trembling in every bough. "And then?
What happens then?"

"We did not see anything more: it was incomparably beautiful."

"I would fain know if I am destined for so glorious a career," cried
the Tree, rejoicing. "That is still better than to cross the sea! What
a longing do I suffer! Were Christmas but come! I am now tall, and my
branches spread like the others that were carried off last year! Oh!
were I but already on the cart! Were I in the warm room with all the
splendor and magnificence! Yes; then something better, something still
grander, will surely follow, or wherefore should they thus ornament me?
Something better, something still grander must follow--but what? Oh, how
I long, how I suffer! I do not know myself what is the matter with me!"

"Rejoice in our presence!" said the Air and the Sunlight. "Rejoice in
thy own fresh youth!"

But the Tree did not rejoice at all; he grew and grew, and was green
both winter and summer. People that saw him said, "What a fine tree!"
 and towards Christmas he was one of the first that was cut down. The axe
struck deep into the very pith; the Tree fell to the earth with a sigh;
he felt a pang--it was like a swoon; he could not think of happiness,
for he was sorrowful at being separated from his home, from the place
where he had sprung up. He well knew that he should never see his dear
old comrades, the little bushes and flowers around him, anymore; perhaps
not even the birds! The departure was not at all agreeable.

The Tree only came to himself when he was unloaded in a court-yard with
the other trees, and heard a man say, "That one is splendid! We don't
want the others." Then two servants came in rich livery and carried the
Fir Tree into a large and splendid drawing-room. Portraits were hanging
on the walls, and near the white porcelain stove stood two large Chinese
vases with lions on the covers. There, too, were large easy-chairs,
silken sofas, large tables full of picture-books and full of toys, worth
hundreds and hundreds of crowns--at least the children said so. And the
Fir Tree was stuck upright in a cask that was filled with sand; but no
one could see that it was a cask, for green cloth was hung all round it,
and it stood on a large gaily-colored carpet. Oh! how the Tree quivered!
What was to happen? The servants, as well as the young ladies, decorated
it. On one branch there hung little nets cut out of colored paper, and
each net was filled with sugarplums; and among the other boughs gilded
apples and walnuts were suspended, looking as though they had grown
there, and little blue and white tapers were placed among the leaves.
Dolls that looked for all the world like men--the Tree had never beheld
such before--were seen among the foliage, and at the very top a
large star of gold tinsel was fixed. It was really splendid--beyond
description splendid.

"This evening!" they all said. "How it will shine this evening!"

"Oh!" thought the Tree. "If the evening were but come! If the tapers
were but lighted! And then I wonder what will happen! Perhaps the other
trees from the forest will come to look at me! Perhaps the sparrows will
beat against the windowpanes! I wonder if I shall take root here, and
winter and summer stand covered with ornaments!"

He knew very much about the matter--but he was so impatient that for
sheer longing he got a pain in his back, and this with trees is the same
thing as a headache with us.

The candles were now lighted--what brightness! What splendor! The
Tree trembled so in every bough that one of the tapers set fire to the
foliage. It blazed up famously.

"Help! Help!" cried the young ladies, and they quickly put out the fire.

Now the Tree did not even dare tremble. What a state he was in! He was
so uneasy lest he should lose something of his splendor, that he was
quite bewildered amidst the glare and brightness; when suddenly both
folding-doors opened and a troop of children rushed in as if they would
upset the Tree. The older persons followed quietly; the little ones
stood quite still. But it was only for a moment; then they shouted that
the whole place re-echoed with their rejoicing; they danced round the
Tree, and one present after the other was pulled off.

"What are they about?" thought the Tree. "What is to happen now!" And
the lights burned down to the very branches, and as they burned down
they were put out one after the other, and then the children had
permission to plunder the Tree. So they fell upon it with such violence
that all its branches cracked; if it had not been fixed firmly in the
ground, it would certainly have tumbled down.

The children danced about with their beautiful playthings; no one looked
at the Tree except the old nurse, who peeped between the branches; but
it was only to see if there was a fig or an apple left that had been
forgotten.

"A story! A story!" cried the children, drawing a little fat man towards
the Tree. He seated himself under it and said, "Now we are in the shade,
and the Tree can listen too. But I shall tell only one story. Now which
will you have; that about Ivedy-Avedy, or about Humpy-Dumpy, who
tumbled downstairs, and yet after all came to the throne and married the
princess?"

"Ivedy-Avedy," cried some; "Humpy-Dumpy," cried the others. There was
such a bawling and screaming--the Fir Tree alone was silent, and he
thought to himself, "Am I not to bawl with the rest? Am I to do nothing
whatever?" for he was one of the company, and had done what he had to
do.

And the man told about Humpy-Dumpy that tumbled down, who
notwithstanding came to the throne, and at last married the princess.
And the children clapped their hands, and cried. "Oh, go on! Do go on!"
 They wanted to hear about Ivedy-Avedy too, but the little man only told
them about Humpy-Dumpy. The Fir Tree stood quite still and absorbed
in thought; the birds in the wood had never related the like of this.
"Humpy-Dumpy fell downstairs, and yet he married the princess! Yes, yes!
That's the way of the world!" thought the Fir Tree, and believed it all,
because the man who told the story was so good-looking. "Well, well! who
knows, perhaps I may fall downstairs, too, and get a princess as wife!"
 And he looked forward with joy to the morrow, when he hoped to be decked
out again with lights, playthings, fruits, and tinsel.

"I won't tremble to-morrow!" thought the Fir Tree. "I will enjoy to
the full all my splendor! To-morrow I shall hear again the story of
Humpy-Dumpy, and perhaps that of Ivedy-Avedy too." And the whole night
the Tree stood still and in deep thought.

In the morning the servant and the housemaid came in.

"Now then the splendor will begin again," thought the Fir. But they
dragged him out of the room, and up the stairs into the loft: and here,
in a dark corner, where no daylight could enter, they left him. "What's
the meaning of this?" thought the Tree. "What am I to do here? What
shall I hear now, I wonder?" And he leaned against the wall lost in
reverie. Time enough had he too for his reflections; for days and nights
passed on, and nobody came up; and when at last somebody did come, it
was only to put some great trunks in a corner, out of the way. There
stood the Tree quite hidden; it seemed as if he had been entirely
forgotten.

"'Tis now winter out-of-doors!" thought the Tree. "The earth is hard and
covered with snow; men cannot plant me now, and therefore I have been
put up here under shelter till the spring-time comes! How thoughtful
that is! How kind man is, after all! If it only were not so dark here,
and so terribly lonely! Not even a hare! And out in the woods it was
so pleasant, when the snow was on the ground, and the hare leaped by;
yes--even when he jumped over me; but I did not like it then! It is
really terribly lonely here!"

"Squeak! Squeak!" said a little Mouse, at the same moment, peeping out
of his hole. And then another little one came. They snuffed about the
Fir Tree, and rustled among the branches.

"It is dreadfully cold," said the Mouse. "But for that, it would be
delightful here, old Fir, wouldn't it?"

"I am by no means old," said the Fir Tree. "There's many a one
considerably older than I am."

"Where do you come from," asked the Mice; "and what can you do?" They
were so extremely curious. "Tell us about the most beautiful spot on the
earth. Have you never been there? Were you never in the larder, where
cheeses lie on the shelves, and hams hang from above; where one dances
about on tallow candles: that place where one enters lean, and comes out
again fat and portly?"

"I know no such place," said the Tree. "But I know the wood, where the
sun shines and where the little birds sing." And then he told all about
his youth; and the little Mice had never heard the like before; and they
listened and said,

"Well, to be sure! How much you have seen! How happy you must have
been!"

"I!" said the Fir Tree, thinking over what he had himself related.
"Yes, in reality those were happy times." And then he told about
Christmas-eve, when he was decked out with cakes and candles.

"Oh," said the little Mice, "how fortunate you have been, old Fir Tree!"

"I am by no means old," said he. "I came from the wood this winter; I am
in my prime, and am only rather short for my age."

"What delightful stories you know," said the Mice: and the next night
they came with four other little Mice, who were to hear what the Tree
recounted: and the more he related, the more he remembered himself; and
it appeared as if those times had really been happy times. "But they may
still come--they may still come! Humpy-Dumpy fell downstairs, and yet
he got a princess!" and he thought at the moment of a nice little Birch
Tree growing out in the woods: to the Fir, that would be a real charming
princess.

"Who is Humpy-Dumpy?" asked the Mice. So then the Fir Tree told the
whole fairy tale, for he could remember every single word of it; and the
little Mice jumped for joy up to the very top of the Tree. Next night
two more Mice came, and on Sunday two Rats even; but they said the
stories were not interesting, which vexed the little Mice; and they,
too, now began to think them not so very amusing either.

"Do you know only one story?" asked the Rats.

"Only that one," answered the Tree. "I heard it on my happiest evening;
but I did not then know how happy I was."

"It is a very stupid story! Don't you know one about bacon and tallow
candles? Can't you tell any larder stories?"

"No," said the Tree.

"Then good-bye," said the Rats; and they went home.

At last the little Mice stayed away also; and the Tree sighed: "After
all, it was very pleasant when the sleek little Mice sat round me, and
listened to what I told them. Now that too is over. But I will take good
care to enjoy myself when I am brought out again."

But when was that to be? Why, one morning there came a quantity of
people and set to work in the loft. The trunks were moved, the tree was
pulled out and thrown--rather hard, it is true--down on the floor, but a
man drew him towards the stairs, where the daylight shone.

"Now a merry life will begin again," thought the Tree. He felt the fresh
air, the first sunbeam--and now he was out in the courtyard. All passed
so quickly, there was so much going on around him, the Tree quite forgot
to look to himself. The court adjoined a garden, and all was in flower;
the roses hung so fresh and odorous over the balustrade, the lindens
were in blossom, the Swallows flew by, and said, "Quirre-vit! My husband
is come!" but it was not the Fir Tree that they meant.

"Now, then, I shall really enjoy life," said he exultingly, and spread
out his branches; but, alas, they were all withered and yellow! It was
in a corner that he lay, among weeds and nettles. The golden star of
tinsel was still on the top of the Tree, and glittered in the sunshine.

In the court-yard some of the merry children were playing who had danced
at Christmas round the Fir Tree, and were so glad at the sight of him.
One of the youngest ran and tore off the golden star.

"Only look what is still on the ugly old Christmas tree!" said he,
trampling on the branches, so that they all cracked beneath his feet.

And the Tree beheld all the beauty of the flowers, and the freshness in
the garden; he beheld himself, and wished he had remained in his dark
corner in the loft; he thought of his first youth in the wood, of the
merry Christmas-eve, and of the little Mice who had listened with so
much pleasure to the story of Humpy-Dumpy.

"'Tis over--'tis past!" said the poor Tree. "Had I but rejoiced when I
had reason to do so! But now 'tis past, 'tis past!"

And the gardener's boy chopped the Tree into small pieces; there was a
whole heap lying there. The wood flamed up splendidly under the large
brewing copper, and it sighed so deeply! Each sigh was like a shot.

The boys played about in the court, and the youngest wore the gold star
on his breast which the Tree had had on the happiest evening of his
life. However, that was over now--the Tree gone, the story at an end.
All, all was over--every tale must end at last.
