                                THE MASK


  CAMILLA: You, sir, should unmask.

  STRANGER: Indeed?

  CASSILDA: Indeed it’s time. We all have laid aside disguise but you.

  STRANGER: I wear no mask.

  CAMILLA: (Terrified, aside to Cassilda.) No mask? No mask!

              _The King in Yellow, Act I, Scene 2_.


                                   I

Although I knew nothing of chemistry, I listened fascinated. He picked
up an Easter lily which Geneviève had brought that morning from
Notre Dame, and dropped it into the basin. Instantly the liquid lost
its crystalline clearness. For a second the lily was enveloped in a
milk-white foam, which disappeared, leaving the fluid opalescent.
Changing tints of orange and crimson played over the surface, and
then what seemed to be a ray of pure sunlight struck through from the
bottom where the lily was resting. At the same instant he plunged his
hand into the basin and drew out the flower. “There is no danger,” he
explained, “if you choose the right moment. That golden ray is the
signal.”

He held the lily toward me, and I took it in my hand. It had turned to
stone, to the purest marble.

“You see,” he said, “it is without a flaw. What sculptor could
reproduce it?”

The marble was white as snow, but in its depths the veins of the lily
were tinged with palest azure, and a faint flush lingered deep in its
heart.

“Don’t ask me the reason of that,” he smiled, noticing my wonder. “I
have no idea why the veins and heart are tinted, but they always are.
Yesterday I tried one of Geneviève’s gold-fish,—there it is.”

The fish looked as if sculptured in marble. But if you held it to the
light the stone was beautifully veined with a faint blue, and from
somewhere within came a rosy light like the tint which slumbers in an
opal. I looked into the basin. Once more it seemed filled with clearest
crystal.

“If I should touch it now?” I demanded.

“I don’t know,” he replied, “but you had better not try.”

“There is one thing I’m curious about,” I said, “and that is where the
ray of sunlight came from.”

“It looked like a sunbeam true enough,” he said. “I don’t know, it
always comes when I immerse any living thing. Perhaps,” he continued,
smiling, “perhaps it is the vital spark of the creature escaping to the
source from whence it came.”

I saw he was mocking, and threatened him with a mahl-stick, but he only
laughed and changed the subject.

“Stay to lunch. Geneviève will be here directly.”

“I saw her going to early mass,” I said, “and she looked as fresh and
sweet as that lily—before you destroyed it.”

“Do you think I destroyed it?” said Boris gravely.

“Destroyed, preserved, how can we tell?”

We sat in the corner of a studio near his unfinished group of the
“Fates.” He leaned back on the sofa, twirling a sculptor’s chisel and
squinting at his work.

“By the way,” he said, “I have finished pointing up that old academic
Ariadne, and I suppose it will have to go to the Salon. It’s all I have
ready this year, but after the success the ‘Madonna’ brought me I feel
ashamed to send a thing like that.”

The “Madonna,” an exquisite marble for which Geneviève had sat, had
been the sensation of last year’s Salon. I looked at the Ariadne. It
was a magnificent piece of technical work, but I agreed with Boris
that the world would expect something better of him than that. Still,
it was impossible now to think of finishing in time for the Salon that
splendid terrible group half shrouded in the marble behind me. The
“Fates” would have to wait.

We were proud of Boris Yvain. We claimed him and he claimed us on the
strength of his having been born in America, although his father was
French and his mother was a Russian. Every one in the Beaux Arts called
him Boris. And yet there were only two of us whom he addressed in the
same familiar way—Jack Scott and myself.

Perhaps my being in love with Geneviève had something to do with his
affection for me. Not that it had ever been acknowledged between us.
But after all was settled, and she had told me with tears in her
eyes that it was Boris whom she loved, I went over to his house and
congratulated him. The perfect cordiality of that interview did not
deceive either of us, I always believed, although to one at least it
was a great comfort. I do not think he and Geneviève ever spoke of the
matter together, but Boris knew.

Geneviève was lovely. The Madonna-like purity of her face might have
been inspired by the Sanctus in Gounod’s Mass. But I was always glad
when she changed that mood for what we called her “April Manœuvres.”
She was often as variable as an April day. In the morning grave,
dignified and sweet, at noon laughing, capricious, at evening whatever
one least expected. I preferred her so rather than in that Madonna-like
tranquillity which stirred the depths of my heart. I was dreaming of
Geneviève when he spoke again.

“What do you think of my discovery, Alec?”

“I think it wonderful.”

“I shall make no use of it, you know, beyond satisfying my own
curiosity so far as may be, and the secret will die with me.”

“It would be rather a blow to sculpture, would it not? We painters lose
more than we ever gain by photography.”

Boris nodded, playing with the edge of the chisel.

“This new vicious discovery would corrupt the world of art. No, I shall
never confide the secret to any one,” he said slowly.

It would be hard to find any one less informed about such phenomena
than myself; but of course I had heard of mineral springs so saturated
with silica that the leaves and twigs which fell into them were turned
to stone after a time. I dimly comprehended the process, how the
silica replaced the vegetable matter, atom by atom, and the result
was a duplicate of the object in stone. This, I confess, had never
interested me greatly, and as for the ancient fossils thus produced,
they disgusted me. Boris, it appeared, feeling curiosity instead of
repugnance, had investigated the subject, and had accidentally stumbled
on a solution which, attacking the immersed object with a ferocity
unheard of, in a second did the work of years. This was all I could
make out of the strange story he had just been telling me. He spoke
again after a long silence.

“I am almost frightened when I think what I have found. Scientists
would go mad over the discovery. It was so simple too; it discovered
itself. When I think of that formula, and that new element precipitated
in metallic scales—”

“What new element?”

“Oh, I haven’t thought of naming it, and I don’t believe I ever shall.
There are enough precious metals now in the world to cut throats over.”

I pricked up my ears. “Have you struck gold, Boris?”

“No, better;—but see here, Alec!” he laughed, starting up. “You and I
have all we need in this world. Ah! how sinister and covetous you look
already!” I laughed too, and told him I was devoured by the desire for
gold, and we had better talk of something else; so when Geneviève came
in shortly after, we had turned our backs on alchemy.

Geneviève was dressed in silvery grey from head to foot. The light
glinted along the soft curves of her fair hair as she turned her cheek
to Boris; then she saw me and returned my greeting. She had never
before failed to blow me a kiss from the tips of her white fingers,
and I promptly complained of the omission. She smiled and held out her
hand, which dropped almost before it had touched mine; then she said,
looking at Boris—

“You must ask Alec to stay for luncheon.” This also was something new.
She had always asked me herself until to-day.

“I did,” said Boris shortly.

“And you said yes, I hope?” She turned to me with a charming
conventional smile. I might have been an acquaintance of the day before
yesterday. I made her a low bow. “J’avais bien l’honneur, madame,” but
refusing to take up our usual bantering tone, she murmured a hospitable
commonplace and disappeared. Boris and I looked at one another.

“I had better go home, don’t you think?” I asked.

“Hanged if I know,” he replied frankly.

While we were discussing the advisability of my departure Geneviève
reappeared in the doorway without her bonnet. She was wonderfully
beautiful, but her colour was too deep and her lovely eyes were too
bright. She came straight up to me and took my arm.

“Luncheon is ready. Was I cross, Alec? I thought I had a headache, but
I haven’t. Come here, Boris;” and she slipped her other arm through
his. “Alec knows that after you there is no one in the world whom I
like as well as I like him, so if he sometimes feels snubbed it won’t
hurt him.”

“À la bonheur!” I cried, “who says there are no thunderstorms in April?”

“Are you ready?” chanted Boris. “Aye ready;” and arm-in-arm we raced
into the dining-room, scandalizing the servants. After all we were not
so much to blame; Geneviève was eighteen, Boris was twenty-three, and I
not quite twenty-one.


                                   II

Some work that I was doing about this time on the decorations for
Geneviève’s boudoir kept me constantly at the quaint little hotel in
the Rue Sainte-Cécile. Boris and I in those days laboured hard but as
we pleased, which was fitfully, and we all three, with Jack Scott,
idled a great deal together.

One quiet afternoon I had been wandering alone over the house examining
curios, prying into odd corners, bringing out sweetmeats and cigars
from strange hiding-places, and at last I stopped in the bathing-room.
Boris, all over clay, stood there washing his hands.

The room was built of rose-coloured marble excepting the floor,
which was tessellated in rose and grey. In the centre was a square
pool sunken below the surface of the floor; steps led down into it,
sculptured pillars supported a frescoed ceiling. A delicious marble
Cupid appeared to have just alighted on his pedestal at the upper end
of the room. The whole interior was Boris’ work and mine. Boris, in his
working-clothes of white canvas, scraped the traces of clay and red
modelling wax from his handsome hands, and coquetted over his shoulder
with the Cupid.

“I see you,” he insisted, “don’t try to look the other way and pretend
not to see me. You know who made you, little humbug!”

It was always my rôle to interpret Cupid’s sentiments in these
conversations, and when my turn came I responded in such a manner, that
Boris seized my arm and dragged me toward the pool, declaring he would
duck me. Next instant he dropped my arm and turned pale. “Good God!” he
said, “I forgot the pool is full of the solution!”

I shivered a little, and dryly advised him to remember better where he
had stored the precious liquid.

“In Heaven’s name, why do you keep a small lake of that gruesome stuff
here of all places?” I asked.

“I want to experiment on something large,” he replied.

“On me, for instance?”

“Ah! that came too close for jesting; but I do want to watch the action
of that solution on a more highly organized living body; there is that
big white rabbit,” he said, following me into the studio.

Jack Scott, wearing a paint-stained jacket, came wandering in,
appropriated all the Oriental sweetmeats he could lay his hands on,
looted the cigarette case, and finally he and Boris disappeared
together to visit the Luxembourg Gallery, where a new silver bronze by
Rodin and a landscape of Monet’s were claiming the exclusive attention
of artistic France. I went back to the studio, and resumed my work.
It was a Renaissance screen, which Boris wanted me to paint for
Geneviève’s boudoir. But the small boy who was unwillingly dawdling
through a series of poses for it, to-day refused all bribes to be good.
He never rested an instant in the same position, and inside of five
minutes I had as many different outlines of the little beggar.

“Are you posing, or are you executing a song and dance, my friend?” I
inquired.

“Whichever monsieur pleases,” he replied, with an angelic smile.

Of course I dismissed him for the day, and of course I paid him for the
full time, that being the way we spoil our models.

After the young imp had gone, I made a few perfunctory daubs at my
work, but was so thoroughly out of humour, that it took me the rest
of the afternoon to undo the damage I had done, so at last I scraped
my palette, stuck my brushes in a bowl of black soap, and strolled
into the smoking-room. I really believe that, excepting Geneviève’s
apartments, no room in the house was so free from the perfume of
tobacco as this one. It was a queer chaos of odds and ends, hung with
threadbare tapestry. A sweet-toned old spinet in good repair stood by
the window. There were stands of weapons, some old and dull, others
bright and modern, festoons of Indian and Turkish armour over the
mantel, two or three good pictures, and a pipe-rack. It was here that
we used to come for new sensations in smoking. I doubt if any type of
pipe ever existed which was not represented in that rack. When we had
selected one, we immediately carried it somewhere else and smoked it;
for the place was, on the whole, more gloomy and less inviting than any
in the house. But this afternoon, the twilight was very soothing, the
rugs and skins on the floor looked brown and soft and drowsy; the big
couch was piled with cushions—I found my pipe and curled up there for
an unaccustomed smoke in the smoking-room. I had chosen one with a long
flexible stem, and lighting it fell to dreaming. After a while it went
out, but I did not stir. I dreamed on and presently fell asleep.

I awoke to the saddest music I had ever heard. The room was quite dark,
I had no idea what time it was. A ray of moonlight silvered one edge
of the old spinet, and the polished wood seemed to exhale the sounds
as perfume floats above a box of sandalwood. Some one rose in the
darkness, and came away weeping quietly, and I was fool enough to cry
out “Geneviève!”

She dropped at my voice, and, I had time to curse myself while I made
a light and tried to raise her from the floor. She shrank away with a
murmur of pain. She was very quiet, and asked for Boris. I carried her
to the divan, and went to look for him, but he was not in the house,
and the servants were gone to bed. Perplexed and anxious, I hurried
back to Geneviève. She lay where I had left her, looking very white.

“I can’t find Boris nor any of the servants,” I said.

“I know,” she answered faintly, “Boris has gone to Ept with Mr. Scott.
I did not remember when I sent you for him just now.”

“But he can’t get back in that case before to-morrow afternoon,
and—are you hurt? Did I frighten you into falling? What an awful fool
I am, but I was only half awake.”

“Boris thought you had gone home before dinner. Do please excuse us for
letting you stay here all this time.”

“I have had a long nap,” I laughed, “so sound that I did not know
whether I was still asleep or not when I found myself staring at a
figure that was moving toward me, and called out your name. Have you
been trying the old spinet? You must have played very softly.”

I would tell a thousand more lies worse than that one to see the look
of relief that came into her face. She smiled adorably, and said in her
natural voice: “Alec, I tripped on that wolf’s head, and I think my
ankle is sprained. Please call Marie, and then go home.”

I did as she bade me, and left her there when the maid came in.


                                  III

At noon next day when I called, I found Boris walking restlessly about
his studio.

“Geneviève is asleep just now,” he told me, “the sprain is nothing, but
why should she have such a high fever? The doctor can’t account for it;
or else he will not,” he muttered.

“Geneviève has a fever?” I asked.

“I should say so, and has actually been a little light-headed at
intervals all night. The idea!—gay little Geneviève, without a care in
the world,—and she keeps saying her heart’s broken, and she wants to
die!”

My own heart stood still.

Boris leaned against the door of his studio, looking down, his hands
in his pockets, his kind, keen eyes clouded, a new line of trouble
drawn “over the mouth’s good mark, that made the smile.” The maid had
orders to summon him the instant Geneviève opened her eyes. We waited
and waited, and Boris, growing restless, wandered about, fussing with
modelling wax and red clay. Suddenly he started for the next room.
“Come and see my rose-coloured bath full of death!” he cried.

“Is it death?” I asked, to humour his mood.

“You are not prepared to call it life, I suppose,” he answered. As
he spoke he plucked a solitary gold-fish squirming and twisting out
of its globe. “We’ll send this one after the other—wherever that
is,” he said. There was feverish excitement in his voice. A dull
weight of fever lay on my limbs and on my brain as I followed him to
the fair crystal pool with its pink-tinted sides; and he dropped the
creature in. Falling, its scales flashed with a hot orange gleam in
its angry twistings and contortions; the moment it struck the liquid
it became rigid and sank heavily to the bottom. Then came the milky
foam, the splendid hues radiating on the surface and then the shaft
of pure serene light broke through from seemingly infinite depths.
Boris plunged in his hand and drew out an exquisite marble thing,
blue-veined, rose-tinted, and glistening with opalescent drops.

“Child’s play,” he muttered, and looked wearily, longingly at me,—as
if I could answer such questions! But Jack Scott came in and entered
into the “game,” as he called it, with ardour. Nothing would do but to
try the experiment on the white rabbit then and there. I was willing
that Boris should find distraction from his cares, but I hated to
see the life go out of a warm, living creature and I declined to be
present. Picking up a book at random, I sat down in the studio to read.
Alas! I had found _The King in Yellow_. After a few moments, which
seemed ages, I was putting it away with a nervous shudder, when Boris
and Jack came in bringing their marble rabbit. At the same time the
bell rang above, and a cry came from the sick-room. Boris was gone like
a flash, and the next moment he called, “Jack, run for the doctor;
bring him back with you. Alec, come here.”

I went and stood at her door. A frightened maid came out in haste and
ran away to fetch some remedy. Geneviève, sitting bolt upright, with
crimson cheeks and glittering eyes, babbled incessantly and resisted
Boris’ gentle restraint. He called me to help. At my first touch she
sighed and sank back, closing her eyes, and then—then—as we still
bent above her, she opened them again, looked straight into Boris’
face—poor fever-crazed girl!—and told her secret. At the same instant
our three lives turned into new channels; the bond that held us so
long together snapped for ever and a new bond was forged in its place,
for she had spoken my name, and as the fever tortured her, her heart
poured out its load of hidden sorrow. Amazed and dumb I bowed my head,
while my face burned like a live coal, and the blood surged in my
ears, stupefying me with its clamour. Incapable of movement, incapable
of speech, I listened to her feverish words in an agony of shame and
sorrow. I could not silence her, I could not look at Boris. Then I felt
an arm upon my shoulder, and Boris turned a bloodless face to mine.

“It is not your fault, Alec; don’t grieve so if she loves you—” but
he could not finish; and as the doctor stepped swiftly into the room,
saying—“Ah, the fever!” I seized Jack Scott and hurried him to the
street, saying, “Boris would rather be alone.” We crossed the street
to our own apartments, and that night, seeing I was going to be ill
too, he went for the doctor again. The last thing I recollect with any
distinctness was hearing Jack say, “For Heaven’s sake, doctor, what
ails him, to wear a face like that?” and I thought of _The King in
Yellow_ and the Pallid Mask.

I was very ill, for the strain of two years which I had endured since
that fatal May morning when Geneviève murmured, “I love you, but I
think I love Boris best,” told on me at last. I had never imagined that
it could become more than I could endure. Outwardly tranquil, I had
deceived myself. Although the inward battle raged night after night,
and I, lying alone in my room, cursed myself for rebellious thoughts
unloyal to Boris and unworthy of Geneviève, the morning always brought
relief, and I returned to Geneviève and to my dear Boris with a heart
washed clean by the tempests of the night.

Never in word or deed or thought while with them had I betrayed my
sorrow even to myself.

The mask of self-deception was no longer a mask for me, it was a part
of me. Night lifted it, laying bare the stifled truth below; but there
was no one to see except myself, and when the day broke the mask fell
back again of its own accord. These thoughts passed through my troubled
mind as I lay sick, but they were hopelessly entangled with visions of
white creatures, heavy as stone, crawling about in Boris’ basin,—of
the wolf’s head on the rug, foaming and snapping at Geneviève, who
lay smiling beside it. I thought, too, of the King in Yellow wrapped
in the fantastic colours of his tattered mantle, and that bitter
cry of Cassilda, “Not upon us, oh King, not upon us!” Feverishly I
struggled to put it from me, but I saw the lake of Hali, thin and
blank, without a ripple or wind to stir it, and I saw the towers of
Carcosa behind the moon. Aldebaran, the Hyades, Alar, Hastur, glided
through the cloud-rifts which fluttered and flapped as they passed
like the scolloped tatters of the King in Yellow. Among all these,
one sane thought persisted. It never wavered, no matter what else was
going on in my disordered mind, that my chief reason for existing was
to meet some requirement of Boris and Geneviève. What this obligation
was, its nature, was never clear; sometimes it seemed to be protection,
sometimes support, through a great crisis. Whatever it seemed to be
for the time, its weight rested only on me, and I was never so ill or
so weak that I did not respond with my whole soul. There were always
crowds of faces about me, mostly strange, but a few I recognized, Boris
among them. Afterward they told me that this could not have been, but I
know that once at least he bent over me. It was only a touch, a faint
echo of his voice, then the clouds settled back on my senses, and I
lost him, but he _did_ stand there and bend over me _once_ at least.

At last, one morning I awoke to find the sunlight falling across my
bed, and Jack Scott reading beside me. I had not strength enough to
speak aloud, neither could I think, much less remember, but I could
smile feebly, as Jack’s eye met mine, and when he jumped up and asked
eagerly if I wanted anything, I could whisper, “Yes—Boris.” Jack moved
to the head of my bed, and leaned down to arrange my pillow: I did not
see his face, but he answered heartily, “You must wait, Alec; you are
too weak to see even Boris.”

I waited and I grew strong; in a few days I was able to see whom I
would, but meanwhile I had thought and remembered. From the moment
when all the past grew clear again in my mind, I never doubted what I
should do when the time came, and I felt sure that Boris would have
resolved upon the same course so far as he was concerned; as for what
pertained to me alone, I knew he would see that also as I did. I no
longer asked for any one. I never inquired why no message came from
them; why during the week I lay there, waiting and growing stronger, I
never heard their name spoken. Preoccupied with my own searchings for
the right way, and with my feeble but determined fight against despair,
I simply acquiesced in Jack’s reticence, taking for granted that he was
afraid to speak of them, lest I should turn unruly and insist on seeing
them. Meanwhile I said over and over to myself, how would it be when
life began again for us all? We would take up our relations exactly
as they were before Geneviève fell ill. Boris and I would look into
each other’s eyes, and there would be neither rancour nor cowardice
nor mistrust in that glance. I would be with them again for a little
while in the dear intimacy of their home, and then, without pretext or
explanation, I would disappear from their lives for ever. Boris would
know; Geneviève—the only comfort was that she would never know. It
seemed, as I thought it over, that I had found the meaning of that
sense of obligation which had persisted all through my delirium, and
the only possible answer to it. So, when I was quite ready, I beckoned
Jack to me one day, and said—

“Jack, I want Boris at once; and take my dearest greeting to
Geneviève....”

When at last he made me understand that they were both dead, I fell
into a wild rage that tore all my little convalescent strength to
atoms. I raved and cursed myself into a relapse, from which I crawled
forth some weeks afterward a boy of twenty-one who believed that his
youth was gone for ever. I seemed to be past the capability of further
suffering, and one day when Jack handed me a letter and the keys to
Boris’ house, I took them without a tremor and asked him to tell me
all. It was cruel of me to ask him, but there was no help for it, and
he leaned wearily on his thin hands, to reopen the wound which could
never entirely heal. He began very quietly—

“Alec, unless you have a clue that I know nothing about, you will not
be able to explain any more than I what has happened. I suspect that
you would rather not hear these details, but you must learn them, else
I would spare you the relation. God knows I wish I could be spared the
telling. I shall use few words.

“That day when I left you in the doctor’s care and came back to Boris,
I found him working on the ‘Fates.’ Geneviève, he said, was sleeping
under the influence of drugs. She had been quite out of her mind, he
said. He kept on working, not talking any more, and I watched him.
Before long, I saw that the third figure of the group—the one looking
straight ahead, out over the world—bore his face; not as you ever saw
it, but as it looked then and to the end. This is one thing for which I
should like to find an explanation, but I never shall.

“Well, he worked and I watched him in silence, and we went on that way
until nearly midnight. Then we heard the door open and shut sharply,
and a swift rush in the next room. Boris sprang through the doorway
and I followed; but we were too late. She lay at the bottom of the
pool, her hands across her breast. Then Boris shot himself through the
heart.” Jack stopped speaking, drops of sweat stood under his eyes, and
his thin cheeks twitched. “I carried Boris to his room. Then I went
back and let that hellish fluid out of the pool, and turning on all the
water, washed the marble clean of every drop. When at length I dared
descend the steps, I found her lying there as white as snow. At last,
when I had decided what was best to do, I went into the laboratory,
and first emptied the solution in the basin into the waste-pipe; then
I poured the contents of every jar and bottle after it. There was
wood in the fireplace, so I built a fire, and breaking the locks of
Boris’ cabinet I burnt every paper, notebook and letter that I found
there. With a mallet from the studio I smashed to pieces all the empty
bottles, then loading them into a coal-scuttle, I carried them to the
cellar and threw them over the red-hot bed of the furnace. Six times
I made the journey, and at last, not a vestige remained of anything
which might again aid in seeking for the formula which Boris had found.
Then at last I dared call the doctor. He is a good man, and together we
struggled to keep it from the public. Without him I never could have
succeeded. At last we got the servants paid and sent away into the
country, where old Rosier keeps them quiet with stories of Boris’ and
Geneviève’s travels in distant lands, from whence they will not return
for years. We buried Boris in the little cemetery of Sèvres. The doctor
is a good creature, and knows when to pity a man who can bear no more.
He gave his certificate of heart disease and asked no questions of me.”

Then, lifting his head from his hands, he said, “Open the letter, Alec;
it is for us both.”

I tore it open. It was Boris’ will dated a year before. He left
everything to Geneviève, and in case of her dying childless, I was to
take control of the house in the Rue Sainte-Cécile, and Jack Scott the
management at Ept. On our deaths the property reverted to his mother’s
family in Russia, with the exception of the sculptured marbles executed
by himself. These he left to me.

The page blurred under our eyes, and Jack got up and walked to the
window. Presently he returned and sat down again. I dreaded to hear
what he was going to say, but he spoke with the same simplicity and
gentleness.

“Geneviève lies before the Madonna in the marble room. The Madonna
bends tenderly above her, and Geneviève smiles back into that calm face
that never would have been except for her.”

His voice broke, but he grasped my hand, saying, “Courage, Alec.” Next
morning he left for Ept to fulfil his trust.


                                   IV

The same evening I took the keys and went into the house I had known
so well. Everything was in order, but the silence was terrible. Though
I went twice to the door of the marble room, I could not force myself
to enter. It was beyond my strength. I went into the smoking-room and
sat down before the spinet. A small lace handkerchief lay on the keys,
and I turned away, choking. It was plain I could not stay, so I locked
every door, every window, and the three front and back gates, and
went away. Next morning Alcide packed my valise, and leaving him in
charge of my apartments I took the Orient express for Constantinople.
During the two years that I wandered through the East, at first, in our
letters, we never mentioned Geneviève and Boris, but gradually their
names crept in. I recollect particularly a passage in one of Jack’s
letters replying to one of mine—

“What you tell me of seeing Boris bending over you while you lay ill,
and feeling his touch on your face, and hearing his voice, of course
troubles me. This that you describe must have happened a fortnight
after he died. I say to myself that you were dreaming, that it was part
of your delirium, but the explanation does not satisfy me, nor would it
you.”

Toward the end of the second year a letter came from Jack to me in
India so unlike anything that I had ever known of him that I decided
to return at once to Paris. He wrote: “I am well, and sell all my
pictures as artists do who have no need of money. I have not a care of
my own, but I am more restless than if I had. I am unable to shake off
a strange anxiety about you. It is not apprehension, it is rather a
breathless expectancy—of what, God knows! I can only say it is wearing
me out. Nights I dream always of you and Boris. I can never recall
anything afterward, but I wake in the morning with my heart beating,
and all day the excitement increases until I fall asleep at night
to recall the same experience. I am quite exhausted by it, and have
determined to break up this morbid condition. I must see you. Shall I
go to Bombay, or will you come to Paris?”

I telegraphed him to expect me by the next steamer.

When we met I thought he had changed very little; I, he insisted,
looked in splendid health. It was good to hear his voice again, and as
we sat and chatted about what life still held for us, we felt that it
was pleasant to be alive in the bright spring weather.

We stayed in Paris together a week, and then I went for a week to Ept
with him, but first of all we went to the cemetery at Sèvres, where
Boris lay.

“Shall we place the ‘Fates’ in the little grove above him?” Jack asked,
and I answered—

“I think only the ‘Madonna’ should watch over Boris’ grave.” But Jack
was none the better for my home-coming. The dreams of which he could
not retain even the least definite outline continued, and he said that
at times the sense of breathless expectancy was suffocating.

“You see I do you harm and not good,” I said. “Try a change without
me.” So he started alone for a ramble among the Channel Islands, and I
went back to Paris. I had not yet entered Boris’ house, now mine, since
my return, but I knew it must be done. It had been kept in order by
Jack; there were servants there, so I gave up my own apartment and went
there to live. Instead of the agitation I had feared, I found myself
able to paint there tranquilly. I visited all the rooms—all but one.
I could not bring myself to enter the marble room where Geneviève lay,
and yet I felt the longing growing daily to look upon her face, to
kneel beside her.

One April afternoon, I lay dreaming in the smoking-room, just as
I had lain two years before, and mechanically I looked among the
tawny Eastern rugs for the wolf-skin. At last I distinguished the
pointed ears and flat cruel head, and I thought of my dream where
I saw Geneviève lying beside it. The helmets still hung against
the threadbare tapestry, among them the old Spanish morion which I
remembered Geneviève had once put on when we were amusing ourselves
with the ancient bits of mail. I turned my eyes to the spinet; every
yellow key seemed eloquent of her caressing hand, and I rose, drawn
by the strength of my life’s passion to the sealed door of the marble
room. The heavy doors swung inward under my trembling hands. Sunlight
poured through the window, tipping with gold the wings of Cupid, and
lingered like a nimbus over the brows of the Madonna. Her tender face
bent in compassion over a marble form so exquisitely pure that I knelt
and signed myself. Geneviève lay in the shadow under the Madonna, and
yet, through her white arms, I saw the pale azure vein, and beneath her
softly clasped hands the folds of her dress were tinged with rose, as
if from some faint warm light within her breast.

Bending, with a breaking heart, I touched the marble drapery with my
lips, then crept back into the silent house.

A maid came and brought me a letter, and I sat down in the little
conservatory to read it; but as I was about to break the seal, seeing
the girl lingering, I asked her what she wanted.

She stammered something about a white rabbit that had been caught in
the house, and asked what should be done with it. I told her to let it
loose in the walled garden behind the house, and opened my letter. It
was from Jack, but so incoherent that I thought he must have lost his
reason. It was nothing but a series of prayers to me not to leave the
house until he could get back; he could not tell me why, there were the
dreams, he said—he could explain nothing, but he was sure that I must
not leave the house in the Rue Sainte-Cécile.

As I finished reading I raised my eyes and saw the same maid-servant
standing in the doorway holding a glass dish in which two gold-fish
were swimming: “Put them back into the tank and tell me what you mean
by interrupting me,” I said.

With a half-suppressed whimper she emptied water and fish into an
aquarium at the end of the conservatory, and turning to me asked my
permission to leave my service. She said people were playing tricks on
her, evidently with a design of getting her into trouble; the marble
rabbit had been stolen and a live one had been brought into the house;
the two beautiful marble fish were gone, and she had just found those
common live things flopping on the dining-room floor. I reassured her
and sent her away, saying I would look about myself. I went into the
studio; there was nothing there but my canvases and some casts, except
the marble of the Easter lily. I saw it on a table across the room.
Then I strode angrily over to it. But the flower I lifted from the
table was fresh and fragile and filled the air with perfume.

Then suddenly I comprehended, and sprang through the hallway to the
marble room. The doors flew open, the sunlight streamed into my face,
and through it, in a heavenly glory, the Madonna smiled, as Geneviève
lifted her flushed face from her marble couch and opened her sleepy
eyes.




                       IN THE COURT OF THE DRAGON


    “Oh, thou who burn’st in heart for those who burn
     In Hell, whose fires thyself shall feed in turn;
     How long be crying—‘Mercy on them.’ God!
     Why, who art thou to teach and He to learn?”

In the Church of St. Barnabé vespers were over; the clergy left the
altar; the little choir-boys flocked across the chancel and settled
in the stalls. A Suisse in rich uniform marched down the south aisle,
sounding his staff at every fourth step on the stone pavement; behind
him came that eloquent preacher and good man, Monseigneur C——.

My chair was near the chancel rail, I now turned toward the west end of
the church. The other people between the altar and the pulpit turned
too. There was a little scraping and rustling while the congregation
seated itself again; the preacher mounted the pulpit stairs, and the
organ voluntary ceased.

I had always found the organ-playing at St. Barnabé highly interesting.
Learned and scientific it was, too much so for my small knowledge,
but expressing a vivid if cold intelligence. Moreover, it possessed
the French quality of taste: taste reigned supreme, self-controlled,
dignified and reticent.

To-day, however, from the first chord I had felt a change for the
worse, a sinister change. During vespers it had been chiefly the
chancel organ which supported the beautiful choir, but now and again,
quite wantonly as it seemed, from the west gallery where the great
organ stands, a heavy hand had struck across the church at the serene
peace of those clear voices. It was something more than harsh and
dissonant, and it betrayed no lack of skill. As it recurred again and
again, it set me thinking of what my architect’s books say about the
custom in early times to consecrate the choir as soon as it was built,
and that the nave, being finished sometimes half a century later, often
did not get any blessing at all: I wondered idly if that had been the
case at St. Barnabé, and whether something not usually supposed to be
at home in a Christian church might have entered undetected and taken
possession of the west gallery. I had read of such things happening,
too, but not in works on architecture.

Then I remembered that St. Barnabé was not much more than a hundred
years old, and smiled at the incongruous association of mediaeval
superstitions with that cheerful little piece of eighteenth-century
rococo.

But now vespers were over, and there should have followed a few quiet
chords, fit to accompany meditation, while we waited for the sermon.
Instead of that, the discord at the lower end of the church broke out
with the departure of the clergy, as if now nothing could control it.

I belong to those children of an older and simpler generation who do
not love to seek for psychological subtleties in art; and I have ever
refused to find in music anything more than melody and harmony, but I
felt that in the labyrinth of sounds now issuing from that instrument
there was something being hunted. Up and down the pedals chased him,
while the manuals blared approval. Poor devil! whoever he was, there
seemed small hope of escape!

My nervous annoyance changed to anger. Who was doing this? How dare
he play like that in the midst of divine service? I glanced at the
people near me: not one appeared to be in the least disturbed. The
placid brows of the kneeling nuns, still turned towards the altar, lost
none of their devout abstraction under the pale shadow of their white
head-dress. The fashionable lady beside me was looking expectantly at
Monseigneur C——. For all her face betrayed, the organ might have been
singing an Ave Maria.

But now, at last, the preacher had made the sign of the cross, and
commanded silence. I turned to him gladly. Thus far I had not found the
rest I had counted on when I entered St. Barnabé that afternoon.

I was worn out by three nights of physical suffering and mental
trouble: the last had been the worst, and it was an exhausted body,
and a mind benumbed and yet acutely sensitive, which I had brought to
my favourite church for healing. For I had been reading _The King in
Yellow_.

“The sun ariseth; they gather themselves together and lay them down
in their dens.” Monseigneur C—— delivered his text in a calm voice,
glancing quietly over the congregation. My eyes turned, I knew not
why, toward the lower end of the church. The organist was coming from
behind his pipes, and passing along the gallery on his way out, I saw
him disappear by a small door that leads to some stairs which descend
directly to the street. He was a slender man, and his face was as white
as his coat was black. “Good riddance!” I thought, “with your wicked
music! I hope your assistant will play the closing voluntary.”

With a feeling of relief—with a deep, calm feeling of relief, I turned
back to the mild face in the pulpit and settled myself to listen. Here,
at last, was the ease of mind I longed for.

“My children,” said the preacher, “one truth the human soul finds
hardest of all to learn: that it has nothing to fear. It can never be
made to see that nothing can really harm it.”

“Curious doctrine!” I thought, “for a Catholic priest. Let us see how
he will reconcile that with the Fathers.”

“Nothing can really harm the soul,” he went on, in, his coolest,
clearest tones, “because——”

But I never heard the rest; my eye left his face, I knew not for what
reason, and sought the lower end of the church. The same man was coming
out from behind the organ, and was passing along the gallery _the same
way_. But there had not been time for him to return, and if he had
returned, I must have seen him. I felt a faint chill, and my heart
sank; and yet, his going and coming were no affair of mine. I looked
at him: I could not look away from his black figure and his white
face. When he was exactly opposite to me, he turned and sent across
the church straight into my eyes, a look of hate, intense and deadly:
I have never seen any other like it; would to God I might never see it
again! Then he disappeared by the same door through which I had watched
him depart less than sixty seconds before.

I sat and tried to collect my thoughts. My first sensation was like
that of a very young child badly hurt, when it catches its breath
before crying out.

To suddenly find myself the object of such hatred was exquisitely
painful: and this man was an utter stranger. Why should he hate me
so?—me, whom he had never seen before? For the moment all other
sensation was merged in this one pang: even fear was subordinate to
grief, and for that moment I never doubted; but in the next I began to
reason, and a sense of the incongruous came to my aid.

As I have said, St. Barnabé is a modern church. It is small and well
lighted; one sees all over it almost at a glance. The organ gallery
gets a strong white light from a row of long windows in the clerestory,
which have not even coloured glass.

The pulpit being in the middle of the church, it followed that, when I
was turned toward it, whatever moved at the west end could not fail to
attract my eye. When the organist passed it was no wonder that I saw
him: I had simply miscalculated the interval between his first and his
second passing. He had come in that last time by the other side-door.
As for the look which had so upset me, there had been no such thing,
and I was a nervous fool.

I looked about. This was a likely place to harbour supernatural
horrors! That clear-cut, reasonable face of Monseigneur C——, his
collected manner and easy, graceful gestures, were they not just a
little discouraging to the notion of a gruesome mystery? I glanced
above his head, and almost laughed. That flyaway lady supporting
one corner of the pulpit canopy, which looked like a fringed damask
table-cloth in a high wind, at the first attempt of a basilisk to pose
up there in the organ loft, she would point her gold trumpet at him,
and puff him out of existence! I laughed to myself over this conceit,
which, at the time, I thought very amusing, and sat and chaffed myself
and everything else, from the old harpy outside the railing, who had
made me pay ten centimes for my chair, before she would let me in
(she was more like a basilisk, I told myself, than was my organist
with the anaemic complexion): from that grim old dame, to, yes, alas!
Monseigneur C—— himself. For all devoutness had fled. I had never yet
done such a thing in my life, but now I felt a desire to mock.

As for the sermon, I could not hear a word of it for the jingle in my
ears of

    “The skirts of St. Paul has reached.
     Having preached us those six Lent lectures,
     More unctuous than ever he preached,”

keeping time to the most fantastic and irreverent thoughts.

It was no use to sit there any longer: I must get out of doors and
shake myself free from this hateful mood. I knew the rudeness I was
committing, but still I rose and left the church.

A spring sun was shining on the Rue St. Honoré, as I ran down the
church steps. On one corner stood a barrow full of yellow jonquils,
pale violets from the Riviera, dark Russian violets, and white Roman
hyacinths in a golden cloud of mimosa. The street was full of Sunday
pleasure-seekers. I swung my cane and laughed with the rest. Some one
overtook and passed me. He never turned, but there was the same deadly
malignity in his white profile that there had been in his eyes. I
watched him as long as I could see him. His lithe back expressed the
same menace; every step that carried him away from me seemed to bear
him on some errand connected with my destruction.

I was creeping along, my feet almost refusing to move. There began to
dawn in me a sense of responsibility for something long forgotten. It
began to seem as if I deserved that which he threatened: it reached a
long way back—a long, long way back. It had lain dormant all these
years: it was there, though, and presently it would rise and confront
me. But I would try to escape; and I stumbled as best I could into the
Rue de Rivoli, across the Place de la Concorde and on to the Quai. I
looked with sick eyes upon the sun, shining through the white foam of
the fountain, pouring over the backs of the dusky bronze river-gods, on
the far-away Arc, a structure of amethyst mist, on the countless vistas
of grey stems and bare branches faintly green. Then I saw him again
coming down one of the chestnut alleys of the Cours la Reine.

I left the river-side, plunged blindly across to the Champs Elysées
and turned toward the Arc. The setting sun was sending its rays along
the green sward of the Rond-point: in the full glow he sat on a bench,
children and young mothers all about him. He was nothing but a Sunday
lounger, like the others, like myself. I said the words almost aloud,
and all the while I gazed on the malignant hatred of his face. But he
was not looking at me. I crept past and dragged my leaden feet up the
Avenue. I knew that every time I met him brought him nearer to the
accomplishment of his purpose and my fate. And still I tried to save
myself.

The last rays of sunset were pouring through the great Arc. I passed
under it, and met him face to face. I had left him far down the Champs
Elysées, and yet he came in with a stream of people who were returning
from the Bois de Boulogne. He came so close that he brushed me. His
slender frame felt like iron inside its loose black covering. He showed
no signs of haste, nor of fatigue, nor of any human feeling. His whole
being expressed one thing: the will, and the power to work me evil.

In anguish I watched him where he went down the broad crowded Avenue,
that was all flashing with wheels and the trappings of horses and the
helmets of the Garde Republicaine.

He was soon lost to sight; then I turned and fled. Into the Bois, and
far out beyond it—I know not where I went, but after a long while as
it seemed to me, night had fallen, and I found myself sitting at a
table before a small café. I had wandered back into the Bois. It was
hours now since I had seen him. Physical fatigue and mental suffering
had left me no power to think or feel. I was tired, so tired! I longed
to hide away in my own den. I resolved to go home. But that was a long
way off.

I live in the Court of the Dragon, a narrow passage that leads from the
Rue de Rennes to the Rue du Dragon.

It is an “impasse”; traversable only for foot passengers. Over the
entrance on the Rue de Rennes is a balcony, supported by an iron
dragon. Within the court tall old houses rise on either side, and close
the ends that give on the two streets. Huge gates, swung back during
the day into the walls of the deep archways, close this court, after
midnight, and one must enter then by ringing at certain small doors on
the side. The sunken pavement collects unsavoury pools. Steep stairways
pitch down to doors that open on the court. The ground floors are
occupied by shops of second-hand dealers, and by iron workers. All day
long the place rings with the clink of hammers and the clang of metal
bars.

Unsavoury as it is below, there is cheerfulness, and comfort, and hard,
honest work above.

Five flights up are the ateliers of architects and painters, and the
hiding-places of middle-aged students like myself who want to live
alone. When I first came here to live I was young, and not alone.

I had to walk a while before any conveyance appeared, but at last, when
I had almost reached the Arc de Triomphe again, an empty cab came along
and I took it.

From the Arc to the Rue de Rennes is a drive of more than half an hour,
especially when one is conveyed by a tired cab horse that has been at
the mercy of Sunday fête-makers.

There had been time before I passed under the Dragon’s wings to meet my
enemy over and over again, but I never saw him once, and now refuge was
close at hand.

Before the wide gateway a small mob of children were playing. Our
concierge and his wife walked among them, with their black poodle,
keeping order; some couples were waltzing on the sidewalk. I returned
their greetings and hurried in.

All the inhabitants of the court had trooped out into the street. The
place was quite deserted, lighted by a few lanterns hung high up, in
which the gas burned dimly.

My apartment was at the top of a house, halfway down the court, reached
by a staircase that descended almost into the street, with only a bit
of passage-way intervening, I set my foot on the threshold of the open
door, the friendly old ruinous stairs rose before me, leading up to
rest and shelter. Looking back over my right shoulder, I saw _him,_ ten
paces off. He must have entered the court with me.

He was coming straight on, neither slowly, nor swiftly, but straight on
to me. And now he was looking at me. For the first time since our eyes
encountered across the church they met now again, and I knew that the
time had come.

Retreating backward, down the court, I faced him. I meant to escape by
the entrance on the Rue du Dragon. His eyes told me that I never should
escape.

It seemed ages while we were going, I retreating, he advancing, down
the court in perfect silence; but at last I felt the shadow of the
archway, and the next step brought me within it. I had meant to turn
here and spring through into the street. But the shadow was not that
of an archway; it was that of a vault. The great doors on the Rue du
Dragon were closed. I felt this by the blackness which surrounded me,
and at the same instant I read it in his face. How his face gleamed in
the darkness, drawing swiftly nearer! The deep vaults, the huge closed
doors, their cold iron clamps were all on his side. The thing which
he had threatened had arrived: it gathered and bore down on me from
the fathomless shadows; the point from which it would strike was his
infernal eyes. Hopeless, I set my back against the barred doors and
defied him.

                   *       *       *       *       *

There was a scraping of chairs on the stone floor, and a rustling as
the congregation rose. I could hear the Suisse’s staff in the south
aisle, preceding Monseigneur C—— to the sacristy.

The kneeling nuns, roused from their devout abstraction, made their
reverence and went away. The fashionable lady, my neighbour, rose also,
with graceful reserve. As she departed her glance just flitted over my
face in disapproval.

Half dead, or so it seemed to me, yet intensely alive to every trifle,
I sat among the leisurely moving crowd, then rose too and went toward
the door.

I had slept through the sermon. Had I slept through the sermon? I
looked up and saw him passing along the gallery to his place. Only
his side I saw; the thin bent arm in its black covering looked like
one of those devilish, nameless instruments which lie in the disused
torture-chambers of mediaeval castles.

But I had escaped him, though his eyes had said I should not. _Had_ I
escaped him? That which gave him the power over me came back out of
oblivion, where I had hoped to keep it. For I knew him now. Death and
the awful abode of lost souls, whither my weakness long ago had sent
him—they had changed him for every other eye, but not for mine. I
had recognized him almost from the first; I had never doubted what he
was come to do; and now I knew while my body sat safe in the cheerful
little church, he had been hunting my soul in the Court of the Dragon.

I crept to the door: the organ broke out overhead with a blare. A
dazzling light filled the church, blotting the altar from my eyes. The
people faded away, the arches, the vaulted roof vanished. I raised my
seared eyes to the fathomless glare, and I saw the black stars hanging
in the heavens: and the wet winds from the lake of Hali chilled my face.

And now, far away, over leagues of tossing cloud-waves, I saw the moon
dripping with spray; and beyond, the towers of Carcosa rose behind the
moon.

Death and the awful abode of lost souls, whither my weakness long ago
had sent him, had changed him for every other eye but mine. And now I
heard _his voice_, rising, swelling, thundering through the flaring
light, and as I fell, the radiance increasing, increasing, poured over
me in waves of flame. Then I sank into the depths, and I heard the King
in Yellow whispering to my soul: “It is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God!”




                            THE YELLOW SIGN

    “Let the red dawn surmise
       What we shall do,
     When this blue starlight dies
       And all is through.”


                                   I

There are so many things which are impossible to explain! Why should
certain chords in music make me think of the brown and golden tints of
autumn foliage? Why should the Mass of Sainte Cécile bend my thoughts
wandering among caverns whose walls blaze with ragged masses of virgin
silver? What was it in the roar and turmoil of Broadway at six o’clock
that flashed before my eyes the picture of a still Breton forest
where sunlight filtered through spring foliage and Sylvia bent, half
curiously, half tenderly, over a small green lizard, murmuring: “To
think that this also is a little ward of God!”

When I first saw the watchman his back was toward me. I looked at him
indifferently until he went into the church. I paid no more attention
to him than I had to any other man who lounged through Washington
Square that morning, and when I shut my window and turned back into
my studio I had forgotten him. Late in the afternoon, the day being
warm, I raised the window again and leaned out to get a sniff of air.
A man was standing in the courtyard of the church, and I noticed him
again with as little interest as I had that morning. I looked across
the square to where the fountain was playing and then, with my mind
filled with vague impressions of trees, asphalt drives, and the moving
groups of nursemaids and holiday-makers, I started to walk back to
my easel. As I turned, my listless glance included the man below in
the churchyard. His face was toward me now, and with a perfectly
involuntary movement I bent to see it. At the same moment he raised
his head and looked at me. Instantly I thought of a coffin-worm.
Whatever it was about the man that repelled me I did not know, but the
impression of a plump white grave-worm was so intense and nauseating
that I must have shown it in my expression, for he turned his puffy
face away with a movement which made me think of a disturbed grub in a
chestnut.

I went back to my easel and motioned the model to resume her pose.
After working a while I was satisfied that I was spoiling what I had
done as rapidly as possible, and I took up a palette knife and scraped
the colour out again. The flesh tones were sallow and unhealthy, and I
did not understand how I could have painted such sickly colour into a
study which before that had glowed with healthy tones.

I looked at Tessie. She had not changed, and the clear flush of health
dyed her neck and cheeks as I frowned.

“Is it something I’ve done?” she said.

“No,—I’ve made a mess of this arm, and for the life of me I can’t see
how I came to paint such mud as that into the canvas,” I replied.

“Don’t I pose well?” she insisted.

“Of course, perfectly.”

“Then it’s not my fault?”

“No. It’s my own.”

“I am very sorry,” she said.

I told her she could rest while I applied rag and turpentine to the
plague spot on my canvas, and she went off to smoke a cigarette and
look over the illustrations in the _Courrier Français_.

I did not know whether it was something in the turpentine or a defect
in the canvas, but the more I scrubbed the more that gangrene seemed
to spread. I worked like a beaver to get it out, and yet the disease
appeared to creep from limb to limb of the study before me. Alarmed, I
strove to arrest it, but now the colour on the breast changed and the
whole figure seemed to absorb the infection as a sponge soaks up water.
Vigorously I plied palette-knife, turpentine, and scraper, thinking
all the time what a _séance_ I should hold with Duval who had sold me
the canvas; but soon I noticed that it was not the canvas which was
defective nor yet the colours of Edward. “It must be the turpentine,” I
thought angrily, “or else my eyes have become so blurred and confused
by the afternoon light that I can’t see straight.” I called Tessie, the
model. She came and leaned over my chair blowing rings of smoke into
the air.

“What _have_ you been doing to it?” she exclaimed.

“Nothing,” I growled, “it must be this turpentine!”

“What a horrible colour it is now,” she continued. “Do you think my
flesh resembles green cheese?”

“No, I don’t,” I said angrily; “did you ever know me to paint like that
before?”

“No, indeed!”

“Well, then!”

“It must be the turpentine, or something,” she admitted.

She slipped on a Japanese robe and walked to the window. I scraped and
rubbed until I was tired, and finally picked up my brushes and hurled
them through the canvas with a forcible expression, the tone alone of
which reached Tessie’s ears.

Nevertheless she promptly began: “That’s it! Swear and act silly and
ruin your brushes! You have been three weeks on that study, and now
look! What’s the good of ripping the canvas? What creatures artists
are!”

I felt about as much ashamed as I usually did after such an outbreak,
and I turned the ruined canvas to the wall. Tessie helped me clean my
brushes, and then danced away to dress. From the screen she regaled me
with bits of advice concerning whole or partial loss of temper, until,
thinking, perhaps, I had been tormented sufficiently, she came out to
implore me to button her waist where she could not reach it on the
shoulder.

“Everything went wrong from the time you came back from the window and
talked about that horrid-looking man you saw in the churchyard,” she
announced.

“Yes, he probably bewitched the picture,” I said, yawning. I looked at
my watch.

“It’s after six, I know,” said Tessie, adjusting her hat before the
mirror.

“Yes,” I replied, “I didn’t mean to keep you so long.” I leaned out
of the window but recoiled with disgust, for the young man with the
pasty face stood below in the churchyard. Tessie saw my gesture of
disapproval and leaned from the window.

“Is that the man you don’t like?” she whispered.

I nodded.

“I can’t see his face, but he does look fat and soft. Someway or
other,” she continued, turning to look at me, “he reminds me of a
dream,—an awful dream I once had. Or,” she mused, looking down at her
shapely shoes, “was it a dream after all?”

“How should I know?” I smiled.

Tessie smiled in reply.

“You were in it,” she said, “so perhaps you might know something about
it.”

“Tessie! Tessie!” I protested, “don’t you dare flatter by saying that
you dream about me!”

“But I did,” she insisted; “shall I tell you about it?”

“Go ahead,” I replied, lighting a cigarette.

Tessie leaned back on the open window-sill and began very seriously.

“One night last winter I was lying in bed thinking about nothing at all
in particular. I had been posing for you and I was tired out, yet it
seemed impossible for me to sleep. I heard the bells in the city ring
ten, eleven, and midnight. I must have fallen asleep about midnight
because I don’t remember hearing the bells after that. It seemed to
me that I had scarcely closed my eyes when I dreamed that something
impelled me to go to the window. I rose, and raising the sash leaned
out. Twenty-fifth Street was deserted as far as I could see. I began to
be afraid; everything outside seemed so—so black and uncomfortable.
Then the sound of wheels in the distance came to my ears, and it seemed
to me as though that was what I must wait for. Very slowly the wheels
approached, and, finally, I could make out a vehicle moving along the
street. It came nearer and nearer, and when it passed beneath my window
I saw it was a hearse. Then, as I trembled with fear, the driver turned
and looked straight at me. When I awoke I was standing by the open
window shivering with cold, but the black-plumed hearse and the driver
were gone. I dreamed this dream again in March last, and again awoke
beside the open window. Last night the dream came again. You remember
how it was raining; when I awoke, standing at the open window, my
night-dress was soaked.”

“But where did I come into the dream?” I asked.

“You—you were in the coffin; but you were not dead.”

“In the coffin?”

“Yes.”

“How did you know? Could you see me?”

“No; I only knew you were there.”

“Had you been eating Welsh rarebits, or lobster salad?” I began,
laughing, but the girl interrupted me with a frightened cry.

“Hello! What’s up?” I said, as she shrank into the embrasure by the
window.

“The—the man below in the churchyard;—he drove the hearse.”

“Nonsense,” I said, but Tessie’s eyes were wide with terror. I went to
the window and looked out. The man was gone. “Come, Tessie,” I urged,
“don’t be foolish. You have posed too long; you are nervous.”

“Do you think I could forget that face?” she murmured. “Three times I
saw the hearse pass below my window, and every time the driver turned
and looked up at me. Oh, his face was so white and—and soft? It looked
dead—it looked as if it had been dead a long time.”

I induced the girl to sit down and swallow a glass of Marsala. Then I
sat down beside her, and tried to give her some advice.

“Look here, Tessie,” I said, “you go to the country for a week or two,
and you’ll have no more dreams about hearses. You pose all day, and
when night comes your nerves are upset. You can’t keep this up. Then
again, instead of going to bed when your day’s work is done, you run
off to picnics at Sulzer’s Park, or go to the Eldorado or Coney Island,
and when you come down here next morning you are fagged out. There was
no real hearse. There was a soft-shell crab dream.”

She smiled faintly.

“What about the man in the churchyard?”

“Oh, he’s only an ordinary unhealthy, everyday creature.”

“As true as my name is Tessie Reardon, I swear to you, Mr. Scott, that
the face of the man below in the churchyard is the face of the man who
drove the hearse!”

“What of it?” I said. “It’s an honest trade.”

“Then you think I _did_ see the hearse?”

“Oh,” I said diplomatically, “if you really did, it might not be
unlikely that the man below drove it. There is nothing in that.”

Tessie rose, unrolled her scented handkerchief, and taking a bit of gum
from a knot in the hem, placed it in her mouth. Then drawing on her
gloves she offered me her hand, with a frank, “Good-night, Mr. Scott,”
and walked out.


                                   II

The next morning, Thomas, the bell-boy, brought me the _Herald_ and a
bit of news. The church next door had been sold. I thanked Heaven for
it, not that being a Catholic I had any repugnance for the congregation
next door, but because my nerves were shattered by a blatant exhorter,
whose every word echoed through the aisle of the church as if it had
been my own rooms, and who insisted on his r’s with a nasal persistence
which revolted my every instinct. Then, too, there was a fiend in human
shape, an organist, who reeled off some of the grand old hymns with an
interpretation of his own, and I longed for the blood of a creature
who could play the doxology with an amendment of minor chords which
one hears only in a quartet of very young undergraduates. I believe
the minister was a good man, but when he bellowed: “And the Lorrrrd
said unto Moses, the Lorrrd is a man of war; the Lorrrd is his name. My
wrath shall wax hot and I will kill you with the sworrrrd!” I wondered
how many centuries of purgatory it would take to atone for such a sin.

“Who bought the property?” I asked Thomas.

“Nobody that I knows, sir. They do say the gent wot owns this ’ere
’Amilton flats was lookin’ at it. ’E might be a bildin’ more studios.”

I walked to the window. The young man with the unhealthy face stood by
the churchyard gate, and at the mere sight of him the same overwhelming
repugnance took possession of me.

“By the way, Thomas,” I said, “who is that fellow down there?”

Thomas sniffed. “That there worm, sir? ’Es night-watchman of the
church, sir. ’E maikes me tired a-sittin’ out all night on them steps
and lookin’ at you insultin’ like. I’d a punched ’is ’ed, sir—beg
pardon, sir—”

“Go on, Thomas.”

“One night a comin’ ’ome with ’Arry, the other English boy, I sees ’im
a sittin’ there on them steps. We ’ad Molly and Jen with us, sir, the
two girls on the tray service, an’ ’e looks so insultin’ at us that
I up and sez: ‘Wat you looking hat, you fat slug?’—beg pardon, sir,
but that’s ’ow I sez, sir. Then ’e don’t say nothin’ and I sez: ‘Come
out and I’ll punch that puddin’ ’ed.’ Then I hopens the gate an’ goes
in, but ’e don’t say nothin’, only looks insultin’ like. Then I ’its
’im one, but, ugh! ’is ’ed was that cold and mushy it ud sicken you to
touch ’im.”

“What did he do then?” I asked curiously.

“’Im? Nawthin’.”

“And you, Thomas?”

The young fellow flushed with embarrassment and smiled uneasily.

“Mr. Scott, sir, I ain’t no coward, an’ I can’t make it out at all why
I run. I was in the 5th Lawncers, sir, bugler at Tel-el-Kebir, an’ was
shot by the wells.”

“You don’t mean to say you ran away?”

“Yes, sir; I run.”

“Why?”

“That’s just what I want to know, sir. I grabbed Molly an’ run, an’ the
rest was as frightened as I.”

“But what were they frightened at?”

Thomas refused to answer for a while, but now my curiosity was aroused
about the repulsive young man below and I pressed him. Three years’
sojourn in America had not only modified Thomas’ cockney dialect but
had given him the American’s fear of ridicule.

“You won’t believe me, Mr. Scott, sir?”

“Yes, I will.”

“You will lawf at me, sir?”

“Nonsense!”

He hesitated. “Well, sir, it’s Gawd’s truth that when I ’it ’im ’e
grabbed me wrists, sir, and when I twisted ’is soft, mushy fist one of
’is fingers come off in me ’and.”

The utter loathing and horror of Thomas’ face must have been reflected
in my own, for he added:

“It’s orful, an’ now when I see ’im I just go away. ’E maikes me hill.”

When Thomas had gone I went to the window. The man stood beside the
church-railing with both hands on the gate, but I hastily retreated
to my easel again, sickened and horrified, for I saw that the middle
finger of his right hand was missing.

At nine o’clock Tessie appeared and vanished behind the screen with a
merry “Good morning, Mr. Scott.” When she had reappeared and taken her
pose upon the model-stand I started a new canvas, much to her delight.
She remained silent as long as I was on the drawing, but as soon as the
scrape of the charcoal ceased and I took up my fixative she began to
chatter.

“Oh, I had such a lovely time last night. We went to Tony Pastor’s.”

“Who are ‘we’?” I demanded.

“Oh, Maggie, you know, Mr. Whyte’s model, and Pinkie McCormick—we call
her Pinkie because she’s got that beautiful red hair you artists like
so much—and Lizzie Burke.”

I sent a shower of spray from the fixative over the canvas, and said:
“Well, go on.”

“We saw Kelly and Baby Barnes the skirt-dancer and—and all the rest. I
made a mash.”

“Then you have gone back on me, Tessie?”

She laughed and shook her head.

“He’s Lizzie Burke’s brother, Ed. He’s a perfect gen’l’man.”

I felt constrained to give her some parental advice concerning mashing,
which she took with a bright smile.

“Oh, I can take care of a strange mash,” she said, examining her
chewing gum, “but Ed is different. Lizzie is my best friend.”

Then she related how Ed had come back from the stocking mill in
Lowell, Massachusetts, to find her and Lizzie grown up, and what
an accomplished young man he was, and how he thought nothing of
squandering half-a-dollar for ice-cream and oysters to celebrate his
entry as clerk into the woollen department of Macy’s. Before she
finished I began to paint, and she resumed the pose, smiling and
chattering like a sparrow. By noon I had the study fairly well rubbed
in and Tessie came to look at it.

“That’s better,” she said.

I thought so too, and ate my lunch with a satisfied feeling that all
was going well. Tessie spread her lunch on a drawing table opposite me
and we drank our claret from the same bottle and lighted our cigarettes
from the same match. I was very much attached to Tessie. I had watched
her shoot up into a slender but exquisitely formed woman from a frail,
awkward child. She had posed for me during the last three years, and
among all my models she was my favourite. It would have troubled me
very much indeed had she become “tough” or “fly,” as the phrase goes,
but I never noticed any deterioration of her manner, and felt at heart
that she was all right. She and I never discussed morals at all, and
I had no intention of doing so, partly because I had none myself, and
partly because I knew she would do what she liked in spite of me. Still
I did hope she would steer clear of complications, because I wished her
well, and then also I had a selfish desire to retain the best model I
had. I knew that mashing, as she termed it, had no significance with
girls like Tessie, and that such things in America did not resemble
in the least the same things in Paris. Yet, having lived with my eyes
open, I also knew that somebody would take Tessie away some day, in
one manner or another, and though I professed to myself that marriage
was nonsense, I sincerely hoped that, in this case, there would be a
priest at the end of the vista. I am a Catholic. When I listen to high
mass, when I sign myself, I feel that everything, including myself, is
more cheerful, and when I confess, it does me good. A man who lives
as much alone as I do, must confess to somebody. Then, again, Sylvia
was Catholic, and it was reason enough for me. But I was speaking of
Tessie, which is very different. Tessie also was Catholic and much
more devout than I, so, taking it all in all, I had little fear for my
pretty model until she should fall in love. But _then_ I knew that fate
alone would decide her future for her, and I prayed inwardly that fate
would keep her away from men like me and throw into her path nothing
but Ed Burkes and Jimmy McCormicks, bless her sweet face!

Tessie sat blowing rings of smoke up to the ceiling and tinkling the
ice in her tumbler.

“Do you know that I also had a dream last night?” I observed.

“Not about that man,” she laughed.

“Exactly. A dream similar to yours, only much worse.”

It was foolish and thoughtless of me to say this, but you know how
little tact the average painter has. “I must have fallen asleep about
ten o’clock,” I continued, “and after a while I dreamt that I awoke. So
plainly did I hear the midnight bells, the wind in the tree-branches,
and the whistle of steamers from the bay, that even now I can scarcely
believe I was not awake. I seemed to be lying in a box which had a
glass cover. Dimly I saw the street lamps as I passed, for I must tell
you, Tessie, the box in which I reclined appeared to lie in a cushioned
wagon which jolted me over a stony pavement. After a while I became
impatient and tried to move, but the box was too narrow. My hands were
crossed on my breast, so I could not raise them to help myself. I
listened and then tried to call. My voice was gone. I could hear the
trample of the horses attached to the wagon, and even the breathing of
the driver. Then another sound broke upon my ears like the raising of
a window sash. I managed to turn my head a little, and found I could
look, not only through the glass cover of my box, but also through the
glass panes in the side of the covered vehicle. I saw houses, empty and
silent, with neither light nor life about any of them excepting one. In
that house a window was open on the first floor, and a figure all in
white stood looking down into the street. It was you.”

Tessie had turned her face away from me and leaned on the table with
her elbow.

“I could see your face,” I resumed, “and it seemed to me to be very
sorrowful. Then we passed on and turned into a narrow black lane.
Presently the horses stopped. I waited and waited, closing my eyes with
fear and impatience, but all was silent as the grave. After what seemed
to me hours, I began to feel uncomfortable. A sense that somebody was
close to me made me unclose my eyes. Then I saw the white face of the
hearse-driver looking at me through the coffin-lid——”

A sob from Tessie interrupted me. She was trembling like a leaf. I saw
I had made an ass of myself and attempted to repair the damage.

“Why, Tess,” I said, “I only told you this to show you what influence
your story might have on another person’s dreams. You don’t suppose I
really lay in a coffin, do you? What are you trembling for? Don’t you
see that your dream and my unreasonable dislike for that inoffensive
watchman of the church simply set my brain working as soon as I fell
asleep?”

She laid her head between her arms, and sobbed as if her heart would
break. What a precious triple donkey I had made of myself! But I was
about to break my record. I went over and put my arm about her.

“Tessie dear, forgive me,” I said; “I had no business to frighten you
with such nonsense. You are too sensible a girl, too good a Catholic to
believe in dreams.”

Her hand tightened on mine and her head fell back upon my shoulder, but
she still trembled and I petted her and comforted her.

“Come, Tess, open your eyes and smile.”

Her eyes opened with a slow languid movement and met mine, but their
expression was so queer that I hastened to reassure her again.

“It’s all humbug, Tessie; you surely are not afraid that any harm will
come to you because of that.”

“No,” she said, but her scarlet lips quivered.

“Then, what’s the matter? Are you afraid?”

“Yes. Not for myself.”

“For me, then?” I demanded gaily.

“For you,” she murmured in a voice almost inaudible. “I—I care for
you.”

At first I started to laugh, but when I understood her, a shock
passed through me, and I sat like one turned to stone. This was the
crowning bit of idiocy I had committed. During the moment which elapsed
between her reply and my answer I thought of a thousand responses to
that innocent confession. I could pass it by with a laugh, I could
misunderstand her and assure her as to my health, I could simply point
out that it was impossible she could love me. But my reply was quicker
than my thoughts, and I might think and think now when it was too late,
for I had kissed her on the mouth.

That evening I took my usual walk in Washington Park, pondering over
the occurrences of the day. I was thoroughly committed. There was no
back out now, and I stared the future straight in the face. I was not
good, not even scrupulous, but I had no idea of deceiving either myself
or Tessie. The one passion of my life lay buried in the sunlit forests
of Brittany. Was it buried for ever? Hope cried “No!” For three years
I had been listening to the voice of Hope, and for three years I had
waited for a footstep on my threshold. Had Sylvia forgotten? “No!”
cried Hope.

I said that I was no good. That is true, but still I was not exactly a
comic opera villain. I had led an easy-going reckless life, taking what
invited me of pleasure, deploring and sometimes bitterly regretting
consequences. In one thing alone, except my painting, was I serious,
and that was something which lay hidden if not lost in the Breton
forests.

It was too late for me to regret what had occurred during the day.
Whatever it had been, pity, a sudden tenderness for sorrow, or the
more brutal instinct of gratified vanity, it was all the same now, and
unless I wished to bruise an innocent heart, my path lay marked before
me. The fire and strength, the depth of passion of a love which I had
never even suspected, with all my imagined experience in the world,
left me no alternative but to respond or send her away. Whether because
I am so cowardly about giving pain to others, or whether it was that I
have little of the gloomy Puritan in me, I do not know, but I shrank
from disclaiming responsibility for that thoughtless kiss, and in fact
had no time to do so before the gates of her heart opened and the flood
poured forth. Others who habitually do their duty and find a sullen
satisfaction in making themselves and everybody else unhappy, might
have withstood it. I did not. I dared not. After the storm had abated I
did tell her that she might better have loved Ed Burke and worn a plain
gold ring, but she would not hear of it, and I thought perhaps as long
as she had decided to love somebody she could not marry, it had better
be me. I, at least, could treat her with an intelligent affection, and
whenever she became tired of her infatuation she could go none the
worse for it. For I was decided on that point although I knew how hard
it would be. I remembered the usual termination of Platonic liaisons,
and thought how disgusted I had been whenever I heard of one. I knew I
was undertaking a great deal for so unscrupulous a man as I was, and I
dreamed the future, but never for one moment did I doubt that she was
safe with me. Had it been anybody but Tessie I should not have bothered
my head about scruples. For it did not occur to me to sacrifice Tessie
as I would have sacrificed a woman of the world. I looked the future
squarely in the face and saw the several probable endings to the
affair. She would either tire of the whole thing, or become so unhappy
that I should have either to marry her or go away. If I married her we
would be unhappy. I with a wife unsuited to me, and she with a husband
unsuitable for any woman. For my past life could scarcely entitle me
to marry. If I went away she might either fall ill, recover, and marry
some Eddie Burke, or she might recklessly or deliberately go and do
something foolish. On the other hand, if she tired of me, then her
whole life would be before her with beautiful vistas of Eddie Burkes
and marriage rings and twins and Harlem flats and Heaven knows what. As
I strolled along through the trees by the Washington Arch, I decided
that she should find a substantial friend in me, anyway, and the future
could take care of itself. Then I went into the house and put on my
evening dress, for the little faintly-perfumed note on my dresser said,
“Have a cab at the stage door at eleven,” and the note was signed
“Edith Carmichel, Metropolitan Theatre.”

I took supper that night, or rather we took supper, Miss Carmichel and
I, at Solari’s, and the dawn was just beginning to gild the cross on
the Memorial Church as I entered Washington Square after leaving Edith
at the Brunswick. There was not a soul in the park as I passed along
the trees and took the walk which leads from the Garibaldi statue to
the Hamilton Apartment House, but as I passed the churchyard I saw a
figure sitting on the stone steps. In spite of myself a chill crept
over me at the sight of the white puffy face, and I hastened to pass.
Then he said something which might have been addressed to me or might
merely have been a mutter to himself, but a sudden furious anger flamed
up within me that such a creature should address me. For an instant I
felt like wheeling about and smashing my stick over his head, but I
walked on, and entering the Hamilton went to my apartment. For some
time I tossed about the bed trying to get the sound of his voice out
of my ears, but could not. It filled my head, that muttering sound,
like thick oily smoke from a fat-rendering vat or an odour of noisome
decay. And as I lay and tossed about, the voice in my ears seemed more
distinct, and I began to understand the words he had muttered. They
came to me slowly as if I had forgotten them, and at last I could make
some sense out of the sounds. It was this:

“Have you found the Yellow Sign?”

“Have you found the Yellow Sign?”

“Have you found the Yellow Sign?”

I was furious. What did he mean by that? Then with a curse upon him and
his I rolled over and went to sleep, but when I awoke later I looked
pale and haggard, for I had dreamed the dream of the night before, and
it troubled me more than I cared to think.

I dressed and went down into my studio. Tessie sat by the window, but
as I came in she rose and put both arms around my neck for an innocent
kiss. She looked so sweet and dainty that I kissed her again and then
sat down before the easel.

“Hello! Where’s the study I began yesterday?” I asked.

Tessie looked conscious, but did not answer. I began to hunt among the
piles of canvases, saying, “Hurry up, Tess, and get ready; we must take
advantage of the morning light.”

When at last I gave up the search among the other canvases and turned
to look around the room for the missing study I noticed Tessie standing
by the screen with her clothes still on.

“What’s the matter,” I asked, “don’t you feel well?”

“Yes.”

“Then hurry.”

“Do you want me to pose as—as I have always posed?”

Then I understood. Here was a new complication. I had lost, of course,
the best nude model I had ever seen. I looked at Tessie. Her face was
scarlet. Alas! Alas! We had eaten of the tree of knowledge, and Eden
and native innocence were dreams of the past—I mean for her.

I suppose she noticed the disappointment on my face, for she said: “I
will pose if you wish. The study is behind the screen here where I put
it.”

“No,” I said, “we will begin something new;” and I went into my
wardrobe and picked out a Moorish costume which fairly blazed with
tinsel. It was a genuine costume, and Tessie retired to the screen with
it enchanted. When she came forth again I was astonished. Her long
black hair was bound above her forehead with a circlet of turquoises,
and the ends, curled about her glittering girdle. Her feet were encased
in the embroidered pointed slippers and the skirt of her costume,
curiously wrought with arabesques in silver, fell to her ankles. The
deep metallic blue vest embroidered with silver and the short Mauresque
jacket spangled and sewn with turquoises became her wonderfully. She
came up to me and held up her face smiling. I slipped my hand into my
pocket, and drawing out a gold chain with a cross attached, dropped it
over her head.

“It’s yours, Tessie.”

“Mine?” she faltered.

“Yours. Now go and pose,” Then with a radiant smile she ran behind the
screen and presently reappeared with a little box on which was written
my name.

“I had intended to give it to you when I went home to-night,” she said,
“but I can’t wait now.”

I opened the box. On the pink cotton inside lay a clasp of black onyx,
on which was inlaid a curious symbol or letter in gold. It was neither
Arabic nor Chinese, nor, as I found afterwards, did it belong to any
human script.

“It’s all I had to give you for a keepsake,” she said timidly.

I was annoyed, but I told her how much I should prize it, and promised
to wear it always. She fastened it on my coat beneath the lapel.

“How foolish, Tess, to go and buy me such a beautiful thing as this,” I
said.

“I did not buy it,” she laughed.

“Where did you get it?”

Then she told me how she had found it one day while coming from the
Aquarium in the Battery, how she had advertised it and watched the
papers, but at last gave up all hopes of finding the owner.

“That was last winter,” she said, “the very day I had the first horrid
dream about the hearse.”

I remembered my dream of the previous night but said nothing, and
presently my charcoal was flying over a new canvas, and Tessie stood
motionless on the model-stand.


                                  III

The day following was a disastrous one for me. While moving a framed
canvas from one easel to another my foot slipped on the polished floor,
and I fell heavily on both wrists. They were so badly sprained that it
was useless to attempt to hold a brush, and I was obliged to wander
about the studio, glaring at unfinished drawings and sketches, until
despair seized me and I sat down to smoke and twiddle my thumbs with
rage. The rain blew against the windows and rattled on the roof of the
church, driving me into a nervous fit with its interminable patter.
Tessie sat sewing by the window, and every now and then raised her head
and looked at me with such innocent compassion that I began to feel
ashamed of my irritation and looked about for something to occupy me. I
had read all the papers and all the books in the library, but for the
sake of something to do I went to the bookcases and shoved them open
with my elbow. I knew every volume by its colour and examined them all,
passing slowly around the library and whistling to keep up my spirits.
I was turning to go into the dining-room when my eye fell upon a book
bound in serpent skin, standing in a corner of the top shelf of the
last bookcase. I did not remember it, and from the floor could not
decipher the pale lettering on the back, so I went to the smoking-room
and called Tessie. She came in from the studio and climbed up to reach
the book.

“What is it?” I asked.

“_The King in Yellow._”

I was dumfounded. Who had placed it there? How came it in my rooms? I
had long ago decided that I should never open that book, and nothing on
earth could have persuaded me to buy it. Fearful lest curiosity might
tempt me to open it, I had never even looked at it in book-stores. If
I ever had had any curiosity to read it, the awful tragedy of young
Castaigne, whom I knew, prevented me from exploring its wicked pages.
I had always refused to listen to any description of it, and indeed,
nobody ever ventured to discuss the second part aloud, so I had
absolutely no knowledge of what those leaves might reveal. I stared at
the poisonous mottled binding as I would at a snake.

“Don’t touch it, Tessie,” I said; “come down.”

Of course my admonition was enough to arouse her curiosity, and before
I could prevent it she took the book and, laughing, danced off into the
studio with it. I called to her, but she slipped away with a tormenting
smile at my helpless hands, and I followed her with some impatience.

“Tessie!” I cried, entering the library, “listen, I am serious. Put
that book away. I do not wish you to open it!” The library was empty. I
went into both drawing-rooms, then into the bedrooms, laundry, kitchen,
and finally returned to the library and began a systematic search.
She had hidden herself so well that it was half-an-hour later when I
discovered her crouching white and silent by the latticed window in the
store-room above. At the first glance I saw she had been punished for
her foolishness. _The King in Yellow_ lay at her feet, but the book was
open at the second part. I looked at Tessie and saw it was too late.
She had opened _The King in Yellow_. Then I took her by the hand and
led her into the studio. She seemed dazed, and when I told her to lie
down on the sofa she obeyed me without a word. After a while she closed
her eyes and her breathing became regular and deep, but I could not
determine whether or not she slept. For a long while I sat silently
beside her, but she neither stirred nor spoke, and at last I rose, and,
entering the unused store-room, took the book in my least injured hand.
It seemed heavy as lead, but I carried it into the studio again, and
sitting down on the rug beside the sofa, opened it and read it through
from beginning to end.

When, faint with excess of my emotions, I dropped the volume and leaned
wearily back against the sofa, Tessie opened her eyes and looked at me.

                   *       *       *       *       *

We had been speaking for some time in a dull monotonous strain before
I realized that we were discussing _The King in Yellow_. Oh the sin
of writing such words,—words which are clear as crystal, limpid and
musical as bubbling springs, words which sparkle and glow like the
poisoned diamonds of the Medicis! Oh the wickedness, the hopeless
damnation of a soul who could fascinate and paralyze human creatures
with such words,—words understood by the ignorant and wise alike,
words which are more precious than jewels, more soothing than music,
more awful than death!

We talked on, unmindful of the gathering shadows, and she was begging
me to throw away the clasp of black onyx quaintly inlaid with
what we now knew to be the Yellow Sign. I never shall know why I
refused, though even at this hour, here in my bedroom as I write this
confession, I should be glad to know _what_ it was that prevented me
from tearing the Yellow Sign from my breast and casting it into the
fire. I am sure I wished to do so, and yet Tessie pleaded with me in
vain. Night fell and the hours dragged on, but still we murmured to
each other of the King and the Pallid Mask, and midnight sounded from
the misty spires in the fog-wrapped city. We spoke of Hastur and of
Cassilda, while outside the fog rolled against the blank window-panes
as the cloud waves roll and break on the shores of Hali.

The house was very silent now, and not a sound came up from the misty
streets. Tessie lay among the cushions, her face a grey blot in the
gloom, but her hands were clasped in mine, and I knew that she knew and
read my thoughts as I read hers, for we had understood the mystery of
the Hyades and the Phantom of Truth was laid. Then as we answered each
other, swiftly, silently, thought on thought, the shadows stirred in
the gloom about us, and far in the distant streets we heard a sound.
Nearer and nearer it came, the dull crunching of wheels, nearer and
yet nearer, and now, outside before the door it ceased, and I dragged
myself to the window and saw a black-plumed hearse. The gate below
opened and shut, and I crept shaking to my door and bolted it, but I
knew no bolts, no locks, could keep that creature out who was coming
for the Yellow Sign. And now I heard him moving very softly along the
hall. Now he was at the door, and the bolts rotted at his touch. Now
he had entered. With eyes starting from my head I peered into the
darkness, but when he came into the room I did not see him. It was only
when I felt him envelope me in his cold soft grasp that I cried out
and struggled with deadly fury, but my hands were useless and he tore
the onyx clasp from my coat and struck me full in the face. Then, as
I fell, I heard Tessie’s soft cry and her spirit fled: and even while
falling I longed to follow her, for I knew that the King in Yellow had
opened his tattered mantle and there was only God to cry to now.

I could tell more, but I cannot see what help it will be to the world.
As for me, I am past human help or hope. As I lie here, writing,
careless even whether or not I die before I finish, I can see the
doctor gathering up his powders and phials with a vague gesture to the
good priest beside me, which I understand.

They will be very curious to know the tragedy—they of the outside
world who write books and print millions of newspapers, but I shall
write no more, and the father confessor will seal my last words with
the seal of sanctity when his holy office is done. They of the outside
world may send their creatures into wrecked homes and death-smitten
firesides, and their newspapers will batten on blood and tears, but
with me their spies must halt before the confessional. They know that
Tessie is dead and that I am dying. They know how the people in the
house, aroused by an infernal scream, rushed into my room and found
one living and two dead, but they do not know what I shall tell them
now; they do not know that the doctor said as he pointed to a horrible
decomposed heap on the floor—the livid corpse of the watchman from the
church: “I have no theory, no explanation. That man must have been dead
for months!”

                   *       *       *       *       *

I think I am dying. I wish the priest would—
