V

SIR BALIN FIGHTS WITH HIS BROTHER, SIR BALAN


Now there was a knight at the court more envious than the others of Sir
Balin, for he counted himself one of the best knights in Britain. His
name was Lancear; and going to the king, he begged leave to follow after
Sir Balin and avenge the insult he had put upon the court. "Do thy
best," replied the king, "for I am passing wroth with Balin."

In the meantime came Merlin, and was told of this adventure of the sword
and lady of the lake.

"Now hear me," said he, "when I tell ye that this lady who hath brought
the sword is the falsest damsel living."

"Say not so," they answered, "for she hath a brother a good knight, who
slew another knight this damsel loved; so she, to be revenged upon her
brother, went to the Lady Lile, of Avilion, and besought her help. Then
Lady Lile gave her the sword, and told her that no man should draw it
forth but one, a valiant knight and strong, who should avenge her on her
brother. This, therefore, was the reason why the damsel came here."

"I know it all as well as ye do," answered Merlin; "and would to God
she had never come hither, for never came she into any company but to do
harm; and that good knight who hath achieved the sword shall be himself
slain by it, which shall be great harm and loss, for a better knight
there liveth not; and he shall do unto my lord the king great honor and
service."

Then Sir Lancear, having armed himself at all points, mounted, and rode
after Sir Balin, as fast as he could go, and overtaking him, he cried
aloud, "Abide, Sir knight! wait yet awhile, or I shall make thee do so."

Hearing him cry, Sir Balin fiercely turned his horse, and said, "Fair
knight, what wilt thou with me? wilt thou joust?"

"Yea," said Sir Lancear, "it is for that I have pursued thee."

"Peradventure," answered Balin, "thou hadst best have stayed at home,
for many a man who thinketh himself already victor, endeth by his own
downfall. Of what court art thou?"

"Of King Arthur's court," cried Lancear, "and I am come to revenge the
insult thou hast put on it this day."

"Well," said Sir Balin, "I see that I must fight thee, and I repent to
be obliged to grieve King Arthur or his knights; and thy quarrel seemeth
full foolish to me, for the damsel that is dead worked endless evils
through the land, or else I had been loth as any knight that liveth to
have slain a lady."

"Make thee ready," shouted Lancear, "for one of us shall rest forever in
this field."

But at their first encounter Sir Lancear's spear flew into splinters
from Sir Balin's shield, and Sir Balin's lance pierced with such might
through Sir Lancear's shield, that it rove the hauberk also, and passed
through the knight's body and the horse's crupper. And Sir Balin turning
fiercely round again, drew out his sword, and knew not that he had
already slain him; and then he saw him lie a corpse upon the ground.

At that same moment came a damsel riding towards him as fast as her
horse could gallop, who, when she saw Sir Lancear dead, wept and
sorrowed out of measure, crying, "O, Sir Balin, two bodies hast thou
slain, and one heart; and two hearts in one body; and two souls also
hast thou lost."

Therewith she took the sword from her dead lover's side--for she was Sir
Lancear's lady-love--and setting the pommel of it on the ground, ran
herself through the body with the blade.

When Sir Balin saw her dead he was sorely hurt and grieved in spirit,
and repented the death of Lancear, which had also caused so fair a
lady's death. And being unable to look on their bodies for sorrow, he
turned aside into a forest, where presently as he rode, he saw the arms
of his brother, Sir Balan. And when they were met they put off their
helms, and embraced each other, kissing, and weeping for joy and pity.
Then Sir Balin told Sir Balan all his late adventures, and that he was
on his way to King Ryence, who at that time was besieging Castle
Terrabil. "I will be with thee," answered Sir Balan, "and we will help
each other, as brethren ought to do."

Anon by chance, as they were talking, came King Mark, of Cornwall, by
that way, and when he saw the two dead bodies of Sir Lancear and his
lady lying there, and heard the story of their death, he vowed to build
a tomb to them before he left that place. So pitching his pavilion
there, he sought through all the country round to find a monument, and
found at last a rich and fair one in a church, which he took and raised
above the dead knight and his damsel, writing on it--"Here lieth
Lancear, son of the King of Ireland, who, at his own request, was slain
by Balin; and here beside him also lieth his lady Colombe, who slew
herself with her lover's sword for grief and sorrow."

Then as Sir Balin and Sir Balan rode away, Merlin met with them, and
said to Balin, "Thou hast done thyself great harm not to have saved that
lady's life who slew herself; and because of it, thou shalt strike the
most Dolorous Stroke that ever man struck, save he that smote our Lord.
For thou shalt smite the truest and most worshipful of living knights,
who shall not be recovered from his wounds for many years, and through
that stroke three kingdoms shall be overwhelmed in poverty and misery."

"If I believed," said Balin, "what thou sayest, I would slay myself to
make thee a liar."

At that Merlin vanished suddenly away; but afterwards he met them in
disguise towards night, and told them he could lead them to King
Ryence, whom they sought. "For this night he is to ride with sixty
lances only through a wood hard by."

So Sir Balin and Sir Balan hid themselves within the wood, and at
midnight came out from their ambush among the leaves by the highway, and
waited for the king, whom presently they heard approaching with his
company. Then did they suddenly leap forth and smote at him and
overthrew him and laid him on the ground, and turning on his company
wounded and slew forty of them, and put the rest to flight. And
returning to King Ryence they would have slain him there, but he craved
mercy, and yielded to their grace, crying, "Knights full of prowess,
slay me not; for by my life ye may win something--but my death can avail
ye nought."

"Ye say truth," said the two knights, and put him in a horse-litter, and
went swiftly through all the night, till at cock-crow they came to King
Arthur's palace. There they delivered him to the warders and porters, to
be brought before the king, with this message--"That he was sent to King
Arthur by the knight of the two swords" (for so was Balin known by name,
since his adventure with the damsel) "and by his brother." And so they
rode away again ere sunrise.

Within a month or two thereafter, King Arthur being somewhat sick, went
forth outside the town, and had his pavilion pitched in a meadow, and
there abode, and laid him down on a pallet to sleep, but could get no
rest. And as he lay he heard the sound of a great horse, and looking
out of the tent door, saw a knight ride by, making great lamentation.

"Abide, fair sir," said King Arthur, "and tell me wherefore thou makest
this sorrow."

"Ye may little amend it," said the knight, and so passed on.

Presently after Sir Balin, rode, by chance, past that meadow, and when
he saw the king he alighted and came to him on foot, and kneeled and
saluted him.

"By my head," said King Arthur, "ye be welcome, Sir Balin;" and then he
thanked him heartily for revenging him upon King Ryence, and for sending
him so speedily a prisoner to his castle, and told him how King Nero,
Ryence's brother, had attacked him afterwards to deliver Ryence from
prison; and how he had defeated him and slain him, and also King Lot, of
Orkney, who was joined with Nero, and whom King Pellinore had killed in
the battle. Then when they had thus talked, King Arthur told Sir Balin
of the sullen knight that had just passed his tent, and desired him to
pursue him and to bring him back.

So Sir Balin rode and overtook the knight in a forest with a damsel, and
said, "Sir knight, thou must come back with me unto my lord, King
Arthur, to tell him the cause of thy sorrow, which thou hast refused
even now to do."

"That will I not," replied the knight, "for it would harm me much, and
do him no advantage."

"Sir," said Sir Balin, "I pray thee make ready, for thou must needs go
with me--or else I must fight with thee and take thee by force."

"Wilt thou be warrant for safe conduct, if I go with thee?" inquired the
knight.

"Yea, surely," answered Balin, "I will die else."

So the knight made ready to go with Sir Balin, and left the damsel in
the wood.

But as they went, there came one invisible, and smote the knight through
the body with a spear. "Alas," cried Sir Herleus (for so was he named),
"I am slain under thy guard and conduct, by that traitor knight called
Garlon, who through magic and witchcraft rideth invisibly. Take,
therefore, my horse, which is better than thine, and ride to the damsel
whom we left, and follow the quest I had in hand, as she will lead
thee--and revenge my death when thou best mayest."

"That will I do," said Sir Balin, "by my knighthood, and so I swear to
thee."

Then went Sir Balin to the damsel, and rode forth with her; she carrying
ever with her the truncheon of the spear wherewith Sir Herleus had been
slain. And as they went, a good knight, Perin de Mountbelgard, joined
their company, and vowed to take adventure with them wheresoever they
might go. But presently as they passed a hermitage fast by a churchyard,
came the knight Garlon, again invisible, and smote Sir Perin through the
body with a spear, and slew him as he had slain Sir Herleus. Whereat,
Sir Balin greatly raged, and swore to have Sir Garlon's life, whenever
next he might encounter and behold him in his bodily shape. Anon, he
and the hermit buried the good knight Sir Perin, and rode on with the
damsel till they came to a great castle, whereinto they were about to
enter. But when Sir Balin had passed through the gateway, the portcullis
fell behind him suddenly, leaving the damsel on the outer side, with men
around her, drawing their swords as if to slay her.

When he saw that, Sir Balin climbed with eager haste by wall and tower,
and leaped into the castle moat, and rushed towards the damsel and her
enemies, with his sword drawn, to fight and slay them. But they cried
out, "Put up thy sword, Sir knight, we will not fight thee in this
quarrel, for we do nothing but an ancient custom of this castle."

Then they told him that the lady of the castle was passing sick, and had
lain ill for many years, and might never more be cured, unless she had a
silver dish full of the blood of a pure maid and a king's daughter.
Wherefore the custom of the castle was, that never should a damsel pass
that way but she must give a dish full of her blood. Then Sir Balin
suffered them to bleed the damsel with her own consent, but her blood
helped not the lady of the castle. So on the morrow they departed, after
right good cheer and rest.

Then they rode three or four days without adventure, and came at last to
the abode of a rich man, who sumptuously lodged and fed them. And while
they sat at supper Sir Balin heard a voice of some one groaning
grievously. "What noise is this?" said he.

"Forsooth," said the host, "I will tell you. I was lately at a
tournament, and there I fought a knight who is brother to King Pelles,
and overthrew him twice, for which he swore to be revenged on me through
my best friend, and so he wounded my son, who cannot be recovered till I
have that knight's blood, but he rideth through witchcraft always
invisibly, and I know not his name."

"Ah," said Sir Balin, "but I know him; his name is Garlon, and he hath
slain two knights, companions of mine own, in the same fashion, and I
would rather than all the riches in this realm that I might meet him
face to face."

"Well," said his host, "let me now tell thee that King Pelles hath
proclaimed in all the country a great festival, to be held at Listeniss,
in twenty days from now, whereto no knight may come without a lady. At
that great feast we might perchance find out this Garlon, for many will
be there; and if it please thee we will set forth together."

So on the morrow they rode all three towards Listeniss, and traveled
fifteen days, and reached it on the day the feast began. Then they
alighted and stabled their horses, and went up to the castle, and Sir
Balin's host was denied entrance, having no lady with him. But Sir Balin
was right heartily received, and taken to a chamber, where they unarmed
him, and dressed him in rich robes, of any color that he chose, and told
him he must lay aside his sword. This, however, he refused, and said,
"It is the custom of my country for a knight to keep his sword ever with
him; and if I may not keep it here, I will forthwith depart." Then they
gave him leave to wear his sword. So he went to the great hall, and was
set among knights of rank and worship, and his lady before him.

Soon he found means to ask one who sat near him, "Is there not here a
knight whose name is Garlon?"

"Yonder he goeth," said his neighbor, "he with that black face; he is
the most marvelous knight alive, for he rideth invisibly, and destroyeth
whom he will."

"Ah, well," said Balin, drawing a long breath, "is that indeed the man?
I have aforetime heard of him."

Then he mused long within himself, and thought, "If I shall slay him
here and now, I shall not escape myself; but if I leave him,
peradventure I shall never meet with him again at such advantage; and if
he live, how much more harm and mischief will he do!"

But while he deeply thought, and cast his eyes from time to time upon
Sir Garlon, that false knight saw that he watched him, and thinking that
he could at such a time escape revenge, he came and smote Sir Balin on
the face with the back of his hand, and said, "Knight, why dost thou so
watch me? be ashamed, and eat thy meat, and do that which thou camest
for."

"Thou sayest well," cried Sir Balin, rising fiercely; "now will I
straightway do that which I came to do, as thou shalt find." With that
he whirled his sword aloft and struck him downright on the head, and
clove his skull asunder to the shoulder.

"Give me the truncheon," cried out Sir Balin to his lady, "wherewith he
slew thy knight." And when she gave it him--for she had always carried
it about with her, wherever she had gone--he smote him through the body
with it, and said, "With that truncheon didst thou treacherously murder
a good knight, and now it sticketh in thy felon body."

Then he called to the father of the wounded son, who had come with him
to Listeniss, and said, "Now take as much blood as thou wilt, to heal
thy son withal."

But now arose a terrible confusion, and all the knights leaped from the
table to slay Balin, King Pelles himself the foremost, who cried out,
"Knight, thou hast slain my brother at my board; die, therefore, die,
for thou shalt never leave this castle."

"Slay me, thyself, then," shouted Balin.

"Yea," said the king, "that will I! for no other man shall touch thee,
for the love I bear my brother."

Then King Pelles caught in his hand a grim weapon and smote eagerly at
Balin, but Balin put his sword between his head and the king's stroke,
and saved himself but lost his sword, which fell down smashed and
shivered into pieces by the blow. So being weaponless he ran to the next
room to find a sword, and so from room to room, with King Pelles after
him, he in vain ever eagerly casting his eyes round every place to find
some weapon.

At last he ran into a chamber wondrous richly decked, where was a bed
all dressed with cloth of gold, the richest that could be thought of,
and one who lay quite still within the bed; and by the bedside stood a
table of pure gold, borne on four silver pillars, and on the table
stood a marvelous spear, strangely wrought.

When Sir Balin saw the spear he seized it in his hand, and turned upon
King Pelles, and smote at him so fiercely and so sore that he dropped
swooning to the ground.

But at that Dolorous and awful Stroke the castle rocked and rove
throughout, and all the walls fell crashed and breaking to the earth,
and Balin himself fell also in their midst, struck as it were to stone,
and powerless to move a hand or foot. And so three days he lay amidst
the ruins, until Merlin came and raised him up and brought him a good
horse, and bade him ride out of that land as swiftly as he could.

"May I not take the damsel with me I brought hither?" said Sir Balin.

"Lo! where she lieth dead," said Merlin. "Ah, little knowest thou, Sir
Balin, what thou hast done; for in this castle and that chamber which
thou didst defile, was the blood of our Lord Christ! and also that most
holy cup--the Sangreal--wherefrom the wine was drunk at the last supper
of our Lord. Joseph of Arimathea brought it to this land, when first he
came here to convert and save it. And on that bed of gold it was himself
who lay, and the strange spear beside him was the spear wherewith the
soldier Longus smote our Lord, which evermore had dripped with blood.
King Pelles is the nearest kin to Joseph in direct descent, wherefore he
held these holy things in trust; but now have they all gone at thy
dolorous stroke, no man knoweth whither; and great is the damage to
this land, which until now hath been the happiest of all lands, for by
that stroke thou hast slain thousands, and by the loss and parting of
the Sangreal, the safety of this realm is put in peril, and its great
happiness is gone for evermore."

Then Balin departed from Merlin, struck to his soul with grief and
sorrow, and said, "In this world shall we meet never more."

So he rode forth through the fair cities and the country, and found the
people lying dead on every side. And all the living cried out on him as
he passed, "O Balin, all this misery hast thou done! For the dolorous
stroke thou gavest King Pelles, three countries are destroyed, and doubt
not but revenge will fall on thee at last!"

When he had passed the boundary of those countries, he was somewhat
comforted, and rode eight days without adventure. Anon he came to a
cross, whereon was written in letters of gold, "It is not for a knight
alone to ride towards this castle." Looking up, he saw a hoary ancient
man come towards him, who said, "Sir Balin le Savage, thou passest thy
bounds this way; therefore turn back again, it will be best for thee;"
and with these words he vanished.

Then did he hear a horn blow as it were the death-note of some hunted
beast. "That blast," said Balin, "is blown for me, for I am the prey;
though yet I be not dead." But as he spoke he saw a hundred ladies with
a great troop of knights come forth to meet him with bright faces and
great welcome, who led him to the castle and made a great feast, with
dancing and minstrelsy and all manner of joy.

Then the chief lady of the castle said, "Knight with the two swords,
thou must encounter and fight with a knight hard by, who dwelleth on an
island, for no man may pass this way without encountering him."

"It is a grievous custom," answered Sir Balin.

"There is but one knight to defeat," replied the lady.

"Well," said Sir Balin, "be it as thou wilt. I am ready and quite
willing, and though my horse and my body be full weary, yet is my heart
not weary, save of life. And truly I were glad if I might meet my
death."

"Sir," said one standing by, "methinketh your shield is not good; I will
lend you a bigger."

"I thank thee, sir," said Balin, and took the unknown shield and left
his own, and so rode forth, and put himself and horse into a boat and
came to the island.

As soon as he had landed, he saw come riding towards him, a knight
dressed all in red, upon a horse trapped in the same color. When the red
knight saw Sir Balin, and the two swords he wore, he thought it must
have been his brother (for the red knight was Sir Balan), but when he
saw the strange arms on his shield, he forgot the thought, and came
against him fiercely. At the first course they overthrew each other, and
both lay swooning on the ground; but Sir Balin was the most hurt and
bruised, for he was weary and spent with traveling. So Sir Balan rose
up first to his feet and drew his sword, and Sir Balin painfully rose
against him and raised his shield. Then Sir Balan smote him through the
shield and brake his helmet; and Sir Balin, in return, smote at him with
his fated sword, and had wellnigh slain his brother. And so they fought
till their breaths failed.

Then Sir Balin, looking up, saw all the castle towers stand full of
ladies. So they went again to battle, and wounded each other full sore,
and paused, and breathed again, and then again began the fight; and this
for many times they did, till all the ground was red with blood. And by
now, each had full grievously wounded the other with seven great wounds,
the least of which might have destroyed the mightiest giant in the
world. But still they rose against each other, although their hauberks
now were all unnailed, and they smiting at each other's naked bodies
with their sharp swords. At the last, Sir Balan, the younger brother,
withdrew a little space and laid him down.

Then said Sir Balin le Savage, "What knight art thou? for never before
have I found a knight to match me thus."

"My name," said he, all faintly, "is Balan, brother to the good knight
Sir Balin."

"Ah, God!" cried Balin, "that ever I should see this day!" and therewith
fell down backwards in a swoon.

Then Sir Balan crept with pain upon his feet and hands, and put his
brother's helmet off his head, but could not know him by his face, it
was so hewed and bloody. But presently, when Sir Balin came to, he
said, "Oh! Balan, mine own brother, thou hast slain me, and I thee! All
the wide world saw never greater grief!"

"Alas!" said Sir Balan, "that I ever saw this day; and through mishap
alone I knew thee not, for when I saw thy two swords, if it had not been
for thy strange shield, I should have known thee for my brother."

"Alas!" said Balin, "all this sorrow lieth at the door of one unhappy
knight within the castle, who made me change my shield. If I might live,
I would destroy that castle and its evil customs."

"It were well done," said Balan, "for since I first came hither I have
never been able to depart, for here they made me fight with one who kept
this island, whom I slew, and by enchantment I might never quit it more;
nor couldst thou, brother, hadst thou slain me, and escaped with thine
own life."

Anon came the lady of the castle, and when she heard their talk, and saw
their evil case, she wrung her hands and wept bitterly. So Sir Balan
prayed the lady of her gentleness that, for his true service, she would
bury them both together in that place. This she granted, weeping full
sore, and said it should be done right solemnly and richly, and in the
noblest manner possible. Then did they send for a priest, and received
the holy sacrament at his hands. And Balin said, "Write over us upon our
tomb, that here two brethren slew each other; then shall never good
knight or pilgrim pass this way but he will pray for both our souls."
And anon Sir Balan died, but Sir Balin died not till the midnight after;
and then they both were buried.

On the morrow of their death came Merlin, and took Sir Balin's sword and
fixed on it a new pommel, and set it in a mighty stone, which then, by
magic, he made float upon the water. And so, for many years, it floated
to and fro around the island, till it swam down the river to Camelot,
where young Sir Galahad achieved it, as shall be told hereafter.




VI

THE MARRIAGE OF ARTHUR AND GUINEVERE AND THE FOUNDING OF THE ROUND TABLE


It befell upon a certain day, that King Arthur said to Merlin, "My lords
and knights do daily pray me now to take a wife; but I will have none
without thy counsel, for thou hast ever helped me since I came first to
this crown."

"It is well," said Merlin, "that thou shouldst take a wife, for no man
of bounteous and noble nature should live without one; but is there any
lady whom thou lovest better than another?"

"Yea," said King Arthur, "I love Guinevere, the daughter of King
Leodegrance, of Camelgard, who also holdeth in his house the Round Table
that he had from my father Uther; and as I think, that damsel is the
gentlest and the fairest lady living."

"Sir," answered Merlin, "as for her beauty, she is one of the fairest
that do live; but if ye had not loved her as ye do, I would fain have
had ye choose some other who was both fair and good. But where a man's
heart is set, he will be loth to leave." This Merlin said, knowing the
misery that should hereafter happen from this marriage.

Then King Arthur sent word to King Leodegrance that he mightily desired
to wed his daughter, and how that he had loved her since he saw her
first, when with Kings Ban and Bors he rescued Leodegrance from King
Ryence of North Wales.

When King Leodegrance heard the message, he cried out, "These be the
best tidings I have heard in all my life--so great and worshipful a
prince to seek my daughter for his wife! I would fain give him half my
lands with her straightway, but that he needeth none--and better will it
please him that I send him the Round Table of King Uther, his father,
with a hundred good knights towards the furnishing of it with guests,
for he will soon find means to gather more, and make the table full."

Then King Leodegrance delivered his daughter Guinevere to the messengers
of King Arthur, and also the Round Table with the hundred knights.

So they rode royally and freshly, sometimes by water and sometimes by
land, towards Camelot. And as they rode along in the spring weather,
they made full many sports and pastimes. And, in all those sports and
games, a young knight lately come to Arthur's, court, Sir Lancelot by
name, was passing strong, and won praise from all, being full of grace
and hardihood; and Guinevere also ever looked on him with joy. And
always in the eventide, when the tents were set beside some stream or
forest, many minstrels came and sang before the knights and ladies as
they sat in the tent-doors, and many knights would tell adventures; and
still Sir Lancelot was foremost, and told the knightliest tales, and
sang the goodliest songs, of all the company.

And when they came to Camelot, King Arthur made great joy, and all the
city with him; and riding forth with a great retinue he met Guinevere
and her company, and led her through the streets all filled with people,
and in the midst of all their shoutings and the ringing of church bells,
to a palace hard by his own.

Then, in all haste, the king commanded to prepare the marriage and the
coronation with the stateliest and most honorable pomp that could be
made. And when the day was come, the archbishops led the king to the
cathedral, whereto he walked, clad in his royal robes, and having four
kings, bearing four golden swords, before him; a choir of passing sweet
music going also with him.

In another part, was the queen dressed in her richest ornaments, and led
by archbishops and bishops to the Chapel of the Virgins, the four queens
also of the four kings last mentioned walked before her, bearing four
white doves, according to ancient custom; and after her there followed
many damsels, singing and making every sign of joy.

And when the two processions were come to the churches, so wondrous was
the music and the singing, that all the knights and barons who were
there pressed on each other, as in the crowd of battle, to hear and see
the most they might.

When the king was crowned, he called together all the knights that came
with the Round Table from Camelgard, and twenty-eight others, great and
valiant men, chosen by Merlin out of all the realm, towards making up
the full number of the table. Then the Archbishop of Canterbury blessed
the seats of all the knights, and when they rose again therefrom to pay
their homage to King Arthur, there was found upon the back of each
knight's seat his name, written in letters of gold. But upon one seat
was found written, "This is the Siege Perilous, wherein if any man shall
sit save him whom Heaven hath chosen, he shall be devoured by fire."

Anon came young Gawain, the king's nephew, praying to be made a knight,
whom the king knighted then and there. Soon after came a poor man,
leading with him a tall fair lad of eighteen years of age, riding on a
lean mare. And falling at the king's feet, the poor man said, "Lord, it
was told me, that at this time of thy marriage thou wouldst give to any
man the gift he asked for, so it were not unreasonable."

"That is the truth," replied King Arthur, "and I will make it good."

"Thou sayest graciously and nobly," said the poor man. "Lord, I ask
nothing else but that thou wilt make my son here a knight."

"It is a great thing that thou askest," said the king. "What is thy
name?"

"Aries, the cowherd," answered he.

"Cometh this prayer from thee or from thy son?" inquired King Arthur.

"Nay, lord, not from myself," said he, "but from him only, for I have
thirteen other sons, and all of them will fall to any labor that I put
them to. But this one will do no such work for anything that I or my
wife may do, but is for ever shooting or fighting, and running to see
knights and joustings, and torments me both night and day that he be
made a knight."

"What is thy name?" said the king to the young man.

"My name is Tor," said he.

Then the king, looking at him steadfastly, was well pleased with his
face and figure, and with his look of nobleness and strength.

"Fetch all thy other sons before me," said the king to Aries. But when
he brought them, none of them resembled Tor in size or shape or feature.

Then the king knighted Tor, saying, "Be thou to thy life's end a good
knight and a true, as I pray God thou mayest be; and if thou provest
worthy, and of prowess, one day thou shalt be counted in the Round
Table." Then turning to Merlin, Arthur said, "Prophesy now, O Merlin,
shall Sir Tor become a worthy knight, or not?"

"Yea, lord," said Merlin, "so he ought to be, for he is the son of that
King Pellinore whom thou hast met, and proved to be one of the best
knights living. He is no cowherd's son."

Presently after came in King Pellinore, and when he saw Sir Tor he knew
him for his son, and was more pleased than words can tell to find him
knighted by the king. And Pellinore did homage to King Arthur, and was
gladly and graciously accepted of the king; and then was led by Merlin
to a high seat at the Table Round, near to the Perilous Seat.

But Sir Gawain was full of anger at the honor done King Pellinore, and
said to his brother Gaheris, "He slew our father, King Lot, therefore
will I slay him."

"Do it not yet," said he; "wait till I also be a knight, then will I
help ye in it: it is best ye suffer him to go at this time, and not
trouble this high feast with blood-shed."

"As ye will, be it," said Sir Gawain.

Then rose the king and spake to all the Table Round, and charged them to
be ever true and noble knights, to do neither outrage nor murder, nor
any unjust violence, and always to flee treason; also by no means ever
to be cruel, but give mercy unto him that asked for mercy, upon pain of
forfeiting the liberty of his court forevermore. Moreover, at all times,
on pain of death, to give all succor unto ladies and young damsels; and
lastly, never to take part in any wrongful quarrel, for reward or
payment. And to all this he swore them knight by knight.

Then he ordained that, every year at Pentecost, they should all come
before him, wheresoever he might appoint a place, and give account of
all their doings and adventures of the past twelve-month. And so, with
prayer and blessing, and high words of cheer, he instituted the most
noble order of the Round Table, whereto the best and bravest knights in
all the world sought afterwards to find admission.

Then was the high feast made ready, and the king and queen sat side by
side, before the whole assembly; and great and royal was the banquet and
the pomp.

And as they sat, each man in his place, Merlin went round and said, "Sit
still awhile, for ye shall see a strange and marvelous adventure."

So as they sat, there suddenly came running through the hall, a white
hart, with a white hound next after him, and thirty couple of black
running hounds, making full cry; and the hart made circuit of the Table
Round, and past the other tables; and suddenly the white hound flew upon
him and bit him fiercely, and tore out a piece from his haunch. Whereat
the hart sprang suddenly with a great leap, and overthrew a knight
sitting at the table, who rose forthwith, and, taking up the hound,
mounted, and rode fast away.

But no sooner had he left, than there came in a lady, mounted on a white
palfrey, who cried out to the king, "Lord, suffer me not to have this
injury!--the hound is mine which that knight taketh." And as she spake,
a knight rode in all armed, on a great horse, and suddenly took up the
lady and rode away with her by force, although she greatly cried and
moaned.

Then the king desired Sir Gawain, Sir Tor, and King Pellinore to mount
and follow this adventure to the uttermost; and told Sir Gawain to bring
back the hart, Sir Tor the hound and knight, and King Pellinore the
knight and the lady.

So Sir Gawain rode forth at a swift pace, and with him Gaheris, his
brother, for a squire. And as they went, they saw two knights fighting
on horseback, and when they reached them they divided them and asked the
reason of their quarrel. "We fight for a foolish matter," one replied,
"for we be brethren; but there came by a white hart this way, chased by
many hounds, and thinking it was an adventure for the high feast of King
Arthur, I would have followed it to have gained worship; whereat my
younger brother here declared he was the better knight and would go
after it instead, and so we fight to prove which of us be the better
knight."

"This is a foolish thing," said Sir Gawain. "Fight with all strangers,
if ye will, but not brother with brother. Take my advice, set on against
me, and if ye yield to me, as I shall do my best to make ye, ye shall go
to King Arthur and yield ye to his grace."

"Sir knight," replied the brothers, "we are weary, and will do thy wish
without encountering thee; but by whom shall we tell the king that we
were sent?"

"By the knight that followeth the quest of the white hart," said Sir
Gawain. "And now tell me your names, and let us part."

"Sorlous and Brian of the Forest," they replied; and so they went their
way to the king's court.

Then Sir Gawain, still following his quest by the distant baying of the
hounds, came to a great river, and saw the hart swimming over and near
to the further bank. And as he was about to plunge in and swim after, he
saw a knight upon the other side, who cried, "Come not over here, Sir
knight, after that hart, save thou wilt joust with me."

"I will not fail for that," said Sir Gawain; and swam his horse across
the stream.

Anon they got their spears, and ran against each other fiercely; and Sir
Gawain smote the stranger off his horse, and turning, bade him yield.

"Nay," replied he, "not so; for though ye have the better of me on
horseback, I pray thee, valiant knight, alight, and let us match
together with our swords on foot."

"What is thy name?" quoth Gawain.

"Allardin of the Isles," replied the stranger.

Then they fell on each other; but soon Sir Gawain struck him through the
helm, so deeply and so hard, that all his brains were scattered, and Sir
Allardin fell dead. "Ah," said Gaheris, "that was a mighty stroke for a
young knight!"

Then did they turn again to follow the white hart, and let slip three
couple of greyhounds after him; and at the last they chased him to a
castle, and there they overtook and slew him, in the chief courtyard.

At that there rushed a knight forth from a chamber, with a drawn sword
in his hand, and slew two of the hounds before their eyes, and chased
the others from the castle, crying, "Oh, my white hart! alas, that thou
art dead! for thee my sovereign lady gave to me, and evil have I kept
thee; but if I live, thy death shall be dear bought." Anon he went
within and armed, and came out fiercely, and met Sir Gawain face to
face.

"Why have ye slain my hounds?" said Sir Gawain; "they did but after
their nature: and ye had better have taken vengeance on me than on the
poor dumb beasts."

"I will avenge me on thee, also," said the other, "ere thou depart this
place."

Then did they fight with each other savagely and madly, till the blood
ran down to their feet. But at last Sir Gawain had the better, and
felled the knight of the castle to the ground. Then he cried out for
mercy, and yielded to Sir Gawain, and besought him as he was a knight
and gentleman to save his life. "Thou shalt die," said Sir Gawain, "for
slaying my hounds."

"I will make thee all amends within my power," replied the knight.

But Sir Gawain would have no mercy, and unlaced his helm to strike his
head off; and so blind was he with rage, that he saw not where a lady
ran out from her chamber and fell down upon his enemy. And making a
fierce blow at him, he smote off by mischance the lady's head.

"Alas!" cried Gaheris, "foully and shamefully have ye done--the shame
shall never leave ye! Why give ye not your mercy unto them that ask it?
a knight without mercy is without worship also."

Then Sir Gawain was sore amazed at that fair lady's death, and knew not
what to do, and said to the fallen knight, "Arise, for I will give thee
mercy."

"Nay, nay," said he, "I care not for thy mercy now, for thou hast slain
my lady and my love--that of all earthly things I loved the best."

"I repent me sorely of it," said Sir Gawain, "for I meant to have struck
thee: but now shalt thou go to King Arthur and tell him this adventure,
and how thou hast been overcome by the knight that followeth the quest
of the white hart."

"I care not whether I live or die, or where I go," replied the knight.

So Sir Gawain sent him to the court to Camelot, making him bear one dead
greyhound before and one behind him on his horse. "Tell me thy name
before we part," said he.

"My name is Athmore of the Marsh," he answered.

Then went Sir Gawain into the castle, and prepared to sleep there and
began to unarm; but Gaheris upbraided him, saying, "Will ye disarm in
this strange country? bethink ye, ye must needs have many enemies
about."

No sooner had he spoken than there came out suddenly four knights, well
armed, and assailed them hard, saying to Sir Gawain, "Thou new-made
knight, how hast thou shamed thy knighthood! a knight without mercy is
dishonored! Slayer of fair ladies, shame to thee evermore! Doubt not
thou shalt thyself have need of mercy ere we leave thee."

Then were the brothers in great jeopardy, and feared for their lives,
for they were but two to four, and weary with traveling; and one of the
four knights shot Sir Gawain with a bolt, and hit him through the arm,
so that he could fight no more. But when there was nothing left for them
but death, there came four ladies forth and prayed the four knights'
mercy for the strangers. So they gave Sir Gawain and Gaheris their
lives, and made them yield themselves prisoners.

On the morrow, came one of the ladies to Sir Gawain, and talked with
him, saying, "Sir knight, what cheer?"

"Not good," said he.

"It is your own default, sir," said the lady, "for ye have done a
passing foul deed in slaying that fair damsel yesterday--and ever shall
it be great shame to you. But ye be not of King Arthur's kin."

"Yea, truly am I," said he; "my name is Gawain, son of King Lot of
Orkney, whom King Pellinore slew--and my mother, Belisent, is
half-sister to the king."

When the lady heard that, she went and presently got leave for him to
quit the castle; and they gave him the head of the white hart to take
with him, because it was in his quest; but made him also carry the dead
lady with him--her head hung round his neck and her body lay before him
on his horse's neck.

So in that fashion he rode back to Camelot; and when the king and queen
saw him, and heard tell of his adventures, they were heavily displeased,
and, by order of the queen, he was put upon his trial before a court of
ladies--who judged him to be evermore, for all his life, the knight of
ladies' quarrels, and to fight always on their side, and never against
any, except he fought for one lady and his adversary for another; also
they charged him never to refuse mercy to him that asked it, and swore
him to it on the Holy Gospels. Thus ended the adventure of the white
hart.

Meanwhile, Sir Tor had made him ready, and followed the knight who rode
away with the hound. And as he went, there suddenly met him in the road
a dwarf, who struck his horse so viciously upon the head with a great
staff, that he leaped backwards a spear's length.

"Wherefore so smitest thou my horse, foul dwarf?" shouted Sir Tor.

"Because thou shalt not pass this way," replied the dwarf, "unless thou
fight for it with yonder knights in those pavilions," pointing to two
tents, where two great spears stood out, and two shields hung upon two
trees hard by.

"I may not tarry, for I am on a quest I needs must follow," said Sir
Tor.

"Thou shalt not pass," replied the dwarf, and therewith blew his horn.
Then rode out quickly at Sir Tor one armed on horseback, but Sir Tor was
quick as he, and riding at him bore him from his horse, and made him
yield. Directly after came another still more fiercely, but with a few
great strokes and buffets Sir Tor unhorsed him also, and sent them both
to Camelot to King Arthur. Then came the dwarf and begged Sir Tor to
take him in his service, "for," said he, "I will serve no more recreant
knights."

"Take then a horse, and come with me," said Tor.

"Ride ye after the knight with the white hound?" said the dwarf; "I can
soon bring ye where he is."

So they rode through the forest till they came to two more tents. And
Sir Tor alighting, went into the first, and saw three damsels lie there,
sleeping. Then went he to the other, and found another lady also
sleeping, and at her feet the white hound he sought for, which instantly
began to bay and bark so loudly, that the lady woke. But Sir Tor had
seized the hound and given it to the dwarf's charge.

"What will ye do, Sir knight?" cried out the lady; "will ye take away my
hound from me by force?"

"Yea, lady," said Sir Tor; "for so I must, having the king's command;
and I have followed it from King Arthur's court, at Camelot, to this
place."

"Well," said the lady, "ye will not go far before ye be ill handled, and
will repent ye of the quest."

"I shall cheerfully abide whatsoever adventure cometh, by the grace of
God," said Sir Tor; and so mounted his horse and began to ride back on
his way. But night coming on, he turned aside to a hermitage that was in
the forest, and there abode till the next day, making but sorrowful
cheer of such poor food as the hermit had to give him, and hearing a
Mass devoutly before he left on the morrow.

And in the early morning, as he rode forth with the dwarf towards
Camelot, he heard a knight call loudly after him, "Turn, turn! Abide,
Sir knight, and yield me up the hound thou tookest from my lady." At
which he turned, and saw a great and strong knight, armed full
splendidly, riding down upon him fiercely through a glade of the forest.

Now Sir Tor was very ill provided, for he had but an old courser, which
was as weak as himself, because of the hermit's scanty fare. He waited,
nevertheless, for the strange knight to come, and at the first onset
with their spears, each unhorsed the other, and then fell to with their
swords like two mad lions. Then did they smite through one another's
shields and helmets till the fragments flew on all sides, and their
blood ran out in streams; but yet they carved and rove through the thick
armor of the hauberks, and gave each other great and ghastly wounds. But
in the end, Sir Tor, finding the strange knight faint, doubled his
strokes until he beat him to the earth. Then did he bid him yield to his
mercy.

"That will I not," replied Abellius, "while my life lasteth and my soul
is in my body, unless thou give me first the hound."

"I cannot," said Sir Tor, "and will not, for it was my quest to bring
again that hound and thee unto King Arthur, or otherwise to slay thee."

With that there came a damsel riding on a palfrey, as fast as she could
drive, and cried out to Sir Tor with a loud voice, "I pray thee, for
King Arthur's love, give me a gift."

"Ask," said Sir Tor, "and I will give thee."

"Gramercy," said the lady, "I ask the head of this false knight
Abellius, the most outrageous murderer that liveth."

"I repent me of the gift I promised," said Sir Tor. "Let him make thee
amends for all his trespasses against thee."

"He cannot make amends," replied the damsel, "for he hath slain my
brother, a far better knight than he, and scorned to give him mercy,
though I kneeled for half an hour before him in the mire, to beg it, and
though it was but by a chance they fought, and for no former injury or
quarrel. I require my gift of thee as a true knight, or else will I
shame thee in King Arthur's court; for this Abellius is the falsest
knight alive, and a murderer of many."

When Abellius heard this, he trembled greatly, and was sore afraid, and
yielded to Sir Tor, and prayed his mercy.

"I cannot now, Sir knight," said he, "lest I be false to my promise. Ye
would not take my mercy when I offered it; and now it is too late."

Therewith he unlaced his helmet, and took it off; but Abellius, in
dismal fear, struggled to his feet, and fled, until Sir Tor overtook
him, and smote off his head entirely with one blow.

"Now, sir," said the damsel, "it is near night, I pray ye come and lodge
at my castle hard by."

"I will, with a good will," said he, for both his horse and he had fared
but poorly since they left Camelot.

So he went to the lady's castle and fared sumptuously, and saw her
husband, an old knight, who greatly thanked him for his service, and
urged him oftentimes to come again.

On the morrow he departed, and reached Camelot by noon, where the king
and queen rejoiced to see him, and the king made him Earl; and Merlin
prophesied that these adventures were but little to the things he should
achieve hereafter.

Now while Sir Gawain and Sir Tor had fulfilled their quests, King
Pellinore pursued the lady whom the knight had seized away from the
wedding-feast. And as he rode through the woods, he saw in a valley a
fair young damsel sitting by a well-side, and a wounded knight lying in
her arms, and King Pellinore saluted her as he passed by.

As soon as she perceived him she cried out, "Help, help me, knight, for
our Lord's sake!" But Pellinore was far too eager in his quest to stay
or turn, although she cried a hundred times to him for help; at which
she prayed to heaven he might have such sore need before he died as she
had now. And presently thereafter her knight died in her arms; and she,
for grief and love, slew herself with his sword.

But King Pellinore rode on till he met a poor man, and asked him had he
seen a knight pass by that way, leading by force a lady with him.

"Yea, surely," said the man, "and greatly did she moan and cry; but even
now another knight is fighting with him to deliver the lady; ride on and
thou shalt find them fighting still."

At that King Pellinore rode swiftly on, and came to where he saw the two
knights fighting, hard by where two pavilions stood. And when he looked
in one of them, he saw the lady that was his quest, and with her the two
squires of the two knights who fought.

"Fair lady," said he, "ye must come with me unto King Arthur's court."

"Sir knight," said the two squires, "yonder be two knights fighting for
this lady; go part them, and get their consent to take her, ere thou
touch her."

"Ye say well," said King Pellinore, and rode between the combatants, and
asked them why they fought.

"Sir knight," said the one, "yon lady is my cousin, mine aunt's
daughter, whom I met borne away against her will, by this knight here,
with whom I therefore fight to free her."

"Sir knight," replied the other, whose name was Hantzlake of Wentland,
"this lady got I, by my arms and prowess, at King Arthur's court
to-day."

"That is false," said King Pellinore; "ye stole the lady suddenly, and
fled away with her, before any knight could arm to stay thee. But it is
my service to take her back again. Neither of ye shall therefore have
her; but if ye will fight for her, fight with me now and here."

"Well," said the knights, "make ready, and we will assail thee with all
our might."

Then Sir Hantzlake ran King Pellinore's horse through with his sword, so
that they might be all alike on foot. But King Pellinore at that was
passing wroth, and ran upon Sir Hantzlake, with a cry, "Keep well thy
head!" and gave him such a stroke upon the helm as clove him to the
chin, so that he fell dead to the ground. When he saw that, the other
knight refused to fight, and kneeling down said, "Take my cousin the
lady with thee, as thy quest is; but as thou art a true knight, suffer
her to come to neither shame nor harm."

So the next day King Pellinore departed for Camelot, and took the lady
with him; and as they rode in a valley full of rough stones, the
damsel's horse stumbled and threw her, so that her arms were sorely
bruised and hurt. And as they rested in the forest for the pain to
lessen, night came on, and there they were compelled to make their
lodging. A little before midnight they heard the trotting of a horse.
"Be ye still," said King Pellinore, "for now we may hear of some
adventure," and therewith he armed her. Then he heard two knights meet
and salute each other, in the dark; one riding from Camelot, the other
from the north.

"What tidings at Camelot?" said one.

"By my head," said the other, "I have but just left there, and have
espied King Arthur's court, and such a fellowship is there as never may
be broke or overcome; for wellnigh all the chivalry of the world is
there, and all full loyal to the king, and now I ride back homewards to
the north to tell our chiefs, that they waste not their strength in wars
against him."

"As for all that," replied the other knight, "I am but now from the
north, and bear with me a remedy, the deadliest poison that ever was
heard tell of, and to Camelot will I with it; for there we have a friend
close to the king, and greatly cherished of him, who hath received gifts
from us to poison him, as he hath promised soon to do."

"Beware," said the first knight, "of Merlin, for he knoweth all things,
by the devil's craft."

"I will not fear for that," replied the other, and so rode on his way.

Anon King Pellinore and the lady passed on again; and when they came to
the well at which the lady with the wounded knight had sat, they found
both knight and damsel utterly devoured by lions and wild beasts, all
save the lady's head.

When King Pellinore saw that, he wept bitterly, saying, "Alas! I might
have saved her life had I but tarried a few moments in my quest."

"Wherefore make so much sorrow now?" said the lady.

"I know not," answered he, "but my heart grieveth greatly for this poor
lady's death, so fair she was and young."

Then he required a hermit to bury the remains of the bodies, and bare
the lady's head with him to Camelot, to the court.

When he was arrived, he was sworn to tell the truth of his quest before
the King and Queen, and when he had entered the Queen somewhat upbraided
him, saying, "Ye were much to blame that ye saved not that lady's life."

"Madam," said he, "I shall repent it all my life."

"Ay, king," quoth Merlin, who suddenly came in, "and so ye ought to do,
for that lady was your daughter, not seen since infancy by thee. And she
was on her way to court, with a right good young knight, who would have
been her husband, but was slain by treachery of a felon knight, Lorraine
le Savage, as they came; and because thou wouldst not abide and help
her, thy best friend shall fail thee in thine hour of greatest need, for
such is the penance ordained thee for that deed."

Then did King Pellinore tell Merlin secretly of the treason he had heard
in the forest, and Merlin by his craft so ordered that the knight who
bare the poison was himself soon after slain by it, and so King Arthur's
life was saved.




VII

THE ADVENTURE OF ARTHUR AND SIR ACCOLON OF GAUL


Being now happily married, King Arthur for a season took his pleasure,
with great tournaments, and jousts, and huntings. So once upon a time
the king and many of his knights rode hunting in a forest, and Arthur,
King Urience, and Sir Accolon of Gaul, followed after a great hart, and
being all three well mounted, they chased so fast that they outsped
their company, and left them many miles behind; but riding still as
rapidly as they could go, at length their horses fell dead under them.
Then being all three on foot, and seeing the stag not far before them,
very weary and nigh spent--"What shall we do," said King Arthur, "for we
are hard bested?" "Let us go on afoot," said King Urience, "till we can
find some lodging." At that they saw the stag lying upon the bank of a
great lake, with a hound springing at his throat, and many other hounds
trooping towards him. So, running forward, Arthur blew the death-note on
his horn, and slew the hart. Then lifting up his eyes he saw before him
on the lake a barge, all draped down to the water's edge, with silken
folds and curtains, which swiftly came towards him, and touched upon
the sands; but when he went up close and looked in, he saw no earthly
creature. Then he cried out to his companions, "Sirs, come ye hither,
and let us see what there is in this ship." So they all three went in,
and found it everywhere throughout furnished, and hung with rich
draperies of silk and gold.

By this time eventide had come, when suddenly a hundred torches were set
up on all sides of the barge, and gave a dazzling light, and at the same
time came forth twelve fair damsels, and saluted King Arthur by his
name, kneeling on their knees, and telling him that he was welcome, and
should have their noblest cheer, for which the king thanked them
courteously. Then did they lead him and his fellows to a splendid
chamber, where was a table spread with all the richest furniture, and
costliest wines and viands; and there they served them with all kinds of
wines and meats, till Arthur wondered at the splendor of the feast,
declaring he had never in his life supped better, or more royally. After
supper they led him to another chamber, than which he had never beheld a
richer, where he was left to rest. King Urience, also, and Sir Accolon
were each conducted into rooms of like magnificence. And so they all
three fell asleep, and being very weary slept deeply all that night.

But when the morning broke, King Urience found himself in his own house
in Camelot, he knew not how; and Arthur awaking found himself in a dark
dungeon, and heard around him nothing but the groans of woeful knights,
prisoners like himself. Then said King Arthur, "Who are ye, thus
groaning and complaining?" And some one answered him, "Alas, we be all
prisoners, even twenty good knights, and some of us have lain here seven
years--some more--nor seen the light of day for all that time." "For
what cause?" said King Arthur. "Know ye not then yourself?" they
answered--"we will soon tell you. The lord of this strong castle is Sir
Damas, and is the falsest and most traitorous knight that liveth; and he
hath a younger brother, a good and noble knight, whose name is Outzlake.
This traitor Damas, although passing rich, will give his brother nothing
of his wealth, and save what Outzlake keepeth to himself by force, he
hath no share of the inheritance. He owneth, nevertheless, one fair rich
manor, whereupon he liveth, loved of all men far and near. But Damas is
as altogether hated as his brother is beloved, for he is merciless and
cowardly: and now for many years there hath been war between these
brothers, and Sir Outzlake evermore defieth Damas to come forth and
fight with him, body to body, for the inheritance; and if he be too
cowardly, to find some champion knight that will fight for him. And
Damas hath agreed to find some champion, but never yet hath found a
knight to take his evil cause in hand, or wager battle for him. So with
a strong band of men-at-arms he lieth ever in ambush, and taketh captive
every passing knight who may unwarily go near and bringeth him into this
castle, and desireth him either to fight Sir Outzlake, or to lie for
evermore indurance. And thus hath he dealt with all of us, for we all
scorned to take up such a cause for such a false foul knight--but rather
one by one came here, where many a good knight hath died of hunger and
disease. But if one of us would fight, Sir Damas would deliver all the
rest."

"God of his mercy send you deliverance," said King Arthur, and sat
turning in his mind how all these things should end, and how he might
himself gain freedom for so many noble hearts.

Anon there came a damsel to the king, saying, "Sir, if thou wilt fight
for my lord thou shalt be delivered out of prison, but else nevermore
shalt thou escape with thy life." "Nay," said King Arthur, "that is but
a hard choice, yet had I rather fight than die in prison, and if I may
deliver not myself alone, but all these others, I will do the battle."
"Yea," said the damsel, "it shall be even so." "Then," said King Arthur,
"I am ready now, if but I had a horse and armor." "Fear not," said she,
"that shalt thou have presently, and shalt lack nothing proper for the
fight." "Have I not seen thee," said the king, "at King Arthur's court?
for it seemeth that thy face is known to me." "Nay," said the damsel, "I
was never there; I am Sir Damas' daughter, and have never been but a
day's journey from this castle." But she spoke falsely, for she was one
of the damsels of Morgan le Fay, the great enchantress, who was King
Arthur's half-sister.

When Sir Damas knew that there had been at length a knight found who
would fight for him, he sent for Arthur, and finding him a man so tall
and strong, and straight of limb, he was passingly well pleased, and
made a covenant with him, that he should fight unto the uttermost for
his cause, and that all the other knights should be delivered. And when
they were sworn to each other on the Holy Gospels, all those imprisoned
knights were straightway led forth and delivered, but abode there one
and all to see the battle.

In the meanwhile there had happened to Sir Accolon of Gaul a strange
adventure; for when he awoke from his deep sleep upon the silken barge,
he found himself upon the edge of a deep well, and in instant peril of
falling thereinto. Whereat, leaping up in great affright, he crossed
himself and cried aloud, "May God preserve my lord King Arthur and King
Urience, for those damsels in the ship have betrayed us, and were
doubtless devils and no women; and if I may escape this misadventure, I
will certainly destroy them wheresoever I may find them." With that
there came to him a dwarf with a great mouth, and a flat nose, and
saluted him, saying that he came from Queen Morgan le Fay. "And she
greeteth you well," said he, "and biddeth you be strong of heart, for
to-morrow you shall do battle with a strange knight, and therefore she
hath sent you here Excalibur, King Arthur's sword, and the scabbard
likewise. And she desireth you as you do love her to fight this battle
to the uttermost, and without any mercy, as you have promised her you
would fight when she should require it of you; and she will make a rich
queen forever of any damsel that shall bring her that knight's head
with whom you are to fight."

"Well," said Sir Accolon, "tell you my lady Queen Morgan, that I shall
hold to that I promised her, now that I have this sword--and," said he,
"I suppose it was to bring about this battle that she made all these
enchantments by her craft." "You have guessed rightly," said the dwarf,
and therewithal he left him.

Then came a knight and lady, and six squires, to Sir Accolon, and took
him to a manor house hard by, and gave him noble cheer; and the house
belonged to Sir Outzlake, the brother of Sir Damas, for so had Morgan le
Fay contrived with her enchantments. Now Sir Outzlake himself was at
that time sorely wounded and disabled, having been pierced through both
his thighs by a spear-thrust. When, therefore, Sir Damas sent down
messengers to his brother, bidding him make ready by to-morrow morning,
and be in the field to fight with a good knight, for that he had found a
champion ready to do battle at all points, Sir Outzlake was sorely
annoyed and distressed, for he knew he had small chance of victory,
while yet he was disabled by his wounds; notwithstanding, he determined
to take the battle in hand, although he was so weak that he must needs
be lifted to his saddle. But when Sir Accolon of Gaul heard this, he
sent a message to Sir Outzlake offering to take the battle in his stead,
which cheered Sir Outzlake mightily, who thanked Sir Accolon with all
his heart, and joyfully accepted him.

So, on the morrow, King Arthur was armed and well horsed, and asked Sir
Damas, "When shall we go to the field?" "Sir," said Sir Damas, "you
shall first hear mass." And when mass was done, there came a squire on a
great horse, and asked Sir Damas if his knight were ready, "for our
knight is already in the field." Then King Arthur mounted on horseback,
and there around were all the knights, and barons, and people of the
country; and twelve of them were chosen to wait upon the two knights who
were about to fight. And as King Arthur sat on horseback, there came a
damsel from Morgan le Fay, and brought to him a sword, made like
Excalibur, and a scabbard also, and said to him, "Morgan le Fay sendeth
you here your sword for her great love's sake." And the king thanked
her, and believed it to be as she said; but she traitorously deceived
him, for both sword and scabbard were counterfeit, brittle, and false,
and the true sword Excalibur was in the hands of Sir Accolon. Then, at
the sound of a trumpet, the champions set themselves on opposite side of
the field, and giving rein and spur to their horses urged them to so
great a speed that each smiting the other in the middle of the shield,
rolled his opponent to the ground, both horse and man. Then starting up
immediately, both drew their swords and rushed swiftly together. And so
they fell to eagerly, and gave each other many great and mighty strokes.

And as they were thus fighting, the damsel Vivien, lady of the lake, who
loved King Arthur, came upon the ground, for she knew by her
enchantments how Morgan le Fay had craftily devised to have King Arthur
slain by his own sword that day, and therefore came to save his life.
And Arthur and Sir Accolon were now grown hot against each other, and
spared not strength nor fury in their fierce assaults; but the king's
sword gave way continually before Sir Accolon's, so that at every stroke
he was sore wounded, and his blood ran from him so fast that it was a
marvel he could stand. When King Arthur saw the ground so sore
be-blooded, he bethought him in dismay that there was magic treason
worked upon him, and that his own true sword was changed, for it seemed
to him that the sword in Sir Accolon's hand was Excalibur, for fearfully
it drew his blood at every blow, while what he held himself kept no
sharp edge, nor fell with any force upon his foe.

"Now, knight, look to thyself, and keep thee well from me," cried out
Sir Accolon. But King Arthur answered not, and gave him such a buffet on
the helm as made him stagger and nigh fall upon the ground. Then Sir
Accolon withdrew a little, and came on with Excalibur on high, and smote
King Arthur in return with such a mighty stroke as almost felled him;
and both being now in hottest wrath, they gave each other grievous and
savage blows. But Arthur all the time was losing so much blood that
scarcely could he keep upon his feet, yet so full was he of knighthood,
that knightly he endured the pain, and still sustained himself, though
now he was so feeble that he thought himself about to die. Sir Accolon,
as yet, had lost no drop of blood, and being very bold and confident in
Excalibur, even grew more vigorous and hasty in his assaults. But all
men who beheld them said they never saw a knight fight half so well as
did King Arthur, and all the people were so grieved for him that they
besought Sir Damas and Sir Outzlake to make up their quarrel and so stay
the fight; but they would not.

So still the battle raged, till Arthur drew a little back for breath and
a few moments' rest; but Accolon came on after him, following fiercely
and crying loud, "It is no time for me to suffer thee to rest," and
therewith set upon him. Then Arthur, full of scorn and rage, lifted up
his sword and struck Sir Accolon upon the helm so mightily that he drove
him to his knees; but with the force of that great stroke his brittle,
treacherous sword broke short off at the hilt, and fell down in the
grass among the blood, leaving the pommel only in his hand. At that,
King Arthur thought within himself that all was over, and secretly
prepared his mind for death, yet kept himself so knightly sheltered by
his shield that he lost no ground, and made as though he yet had hope
and cheer. Then said Sir Accolon, "Sir knight, thou now art overcome and
canst endure no longer, seeing thou art weaponless, and hast lost
already so much blood. Yet am I fully loth to slay thee; yield, then,
therefore, to me as recreant." "Nay," said King Arthur, "that may I not,
for I have promised to do battle to the uttermost by the faith of my
body while my life lasteth; and I had rather die with honor than live
with shame; and if it were possible for me to die an hundred times, I
had rather die as often than yield me to thee, for though I lack
weapons, I shall lack no worship, and it shall be to thy shame to slay
me weaponless." "Aha," shouted then Sir Accolon, "as for the shame, I
will not spare; look to thyself, sir knight, for thou art even now but a
dead man." Therewith he drove at him with pitiless force, and struck him
nearly down; but Arthur evermore waxing in valor as he waned in blood,
pressed on Sir Accolon with his shield, and hit at him so fiercely with
the pommel in his hand, as hurled him three strides backward.

This, therefore, so confused Sir Accolon, that rushing up, all dizzy, to
deliver once again a furious blow, even as he struck, Excalibur, by
Vivien's magic, fell from out his hands upon the earth. Beholding which,
King Arthur lightly sprang to it, and grasped it, and forthwith felt it
was his own good sword, and said to it, "Thou hast been from me all too
long, and done me too much damage." Then spying the scabbard hanging by
Sir Accolon's side, he sprang and pulled it from him, and cast it away
as far as he could throw it; for so long as he had worn it, Arthur knew
his life would have been kept secure. "Oh, knight!" then said the king,
"thou hast this day wrought me much damage by this sword, but now art
thou come to thy death, for I shall not warrant thee but that thou shalt
suffer, ere we part, somewhat of that thou hast made me suffer." And
therewithal King Arthur flew at him with all his might, and pulled him
to the earth, and then struck off his helm, and gave him on the head a
fearful buffet, till the blood leaped forth. "Now will I slay thee!"
cried King Arthur; for his heart was hardened, and his body all on fire
with fever, till for a moment he forgot his knightly mercy. "Slay me
thou mayest," said Sir Accolon, "for thou art the best knight I ever
found, and I see well that God is with thee; and I, as thou hast, have
promised to fight this battle to the uttermost, and never to be recreant
while I live; therefore shall I never yield me with my mouth, and God
must do with my body what he will." And as Sir Accolon spoke, King
Arthur thought he knew his voice; and parting all his blood-stained hair
from out his eyes, and leaning down towards him, saw, indeed, it was his
friend and own true knight. Then said he--keeping his own visor down--"I
pray thee tell me of what country art thou, and what court?" "Sir
knight," he answered, "I am of King Arthur's court, and my name is Sir
Accolon of Gaul." Then said the king, "Oh, sir knight! I pray thee tell
me who gave thee this sword? and from whom thou hadst it?"

Then said Sir Accolon, "Woe worth this sword, for by it I have gotten my
death. This sword hath been in my keeping now for almost twelve months,
and yesterday Queen Morgan le Fay, wife of King Urience, sent it to me
by a dwarf, that therewith I might in some way slay her brother, King
Arthur; for thou must understand that King Arthur is the man she hateth
most in all the world, being full of envy and jealousy because he is of
greater worship and renown than any other of her blood. She loveth me
also as much as she doth hate him; and if she might contrive to slay
King Arthur by her craft and magic, then would she straightway kill her
husband also, and make me the king of all this land, and herself my
queen, to reign with me; but now," said he, "all that is over, for this
day I am come to my death."

"It would have been sore treason of thee to destroy thy lord," said
Arthur. "Thou sayest truly," answered he; "but now that I have told
thee, and openly confessed to thee all that foul treason whereof I now
do bitterly repent, tell me, I pray thee, whence art thou, and of what
court?" "O, Sir Accolon!" said King Arthur, "learn that I am myself King
Arthur." When Sir Accolon heard this he cried aloud, "Alas, my gracious
lord! have mercy on me, for I knew thee not." "Thou shalt have mercy,"
said he, "for thou knewest not my person at this time; and though by
thine own confession thou art a traitor, yet do I blame thee less,
because thou hast been blinded by the false crafts of my sister Morgan
le Fay, whom I have trusted more than all others of my kin, and whom I
now shall know well how to punish." Then did Sir Accolon cry loudly, "O,
lords, and all good people! this noble knight that I have fought with is
the noblest and most worshipful in all the world; for it is King Arthur,
our liege lord and sovereign king; and full sorely I repent that I have
ever lifted lance against him, though in ignorance I did it."

Then all the people fell down on their knees and prayed the pardon of
the king for suffering him to come to such a strait. But he replied,
"Pardon ye cannot have, for, truly, ye have nothing sinned; but here ye
see what ill adventure may ofttimes befall knights-errant, for to my own
hurt, and his danger also, I have fought with one of my own knights."

Then the king commanded Sir Damas to surrender to his brother the whole
manor, Sir Outzlake only yielding him a palfrey every year; "for," said
he scornfully, "it would become thee better to ride on than a courser;"
and ordered Damas, upon pain of death, never again to touch or to
distress knights-errant riding on their adventures; and also to make
full compensation and satisfaction to the twenty knights whom he had
held in prison. "And if any of them," said the king, "come to my court
complaining that he hath not had full satisfaction of thee for his
injuries, by my head, thou shalt die therefor."

Afterwards, King Arthur asked Sir Outzlake to come with him to his
court, where he should become a knight of his, and, if his deeds were
noble, be advanced to all he might desire.

So then he took his leave of all the people and mounted upon horseback,
and Sir Accolon went with him to an abbey hard by, where both their
wounds were dressed. But Sir Accolon died within four days after. And
when he was dead, the king sent his body to Queen Morgan, to Camelot,
saying that he sent her a present in return for the sword Excalibur
which she had sent him by the damsel.

So, on the morrow, there came a damsel from Queen Morgan to the king,
and brought with her the richest mantle that ever was seen, for it was
set as full of precious stones as they could stand against each other,
and they were the richest stones that ever the king saw. And the damsel
said, "Your sister sendeth you this mantle, and prayeth you to take her
gift, and in whatsoever thing she hath offended you, she will amend it
at your pleasure." To this the king replied not, although the mantle
pleased him much. With that came in the lady of the lake, and said,
"Sir, put not on this mantle till thou hast seen more; and in nowise let
it be put upon thee, or any of thy knights, till ye have made the
bringer of it first put it on her." "It shall be done as thou dost
counsel," said the king. Then said he to the damsel that came from his
sister, "Damsel, I would see this mantle ye have brought me upon
yourself." "Sir," said she, "it will not beseem me to wear a knight's
garment." "By my head," said King Arthur, "thou shalt wear it ere it go
on any other person's back!" And so they put it on her by force, and
forthwith the garment burst into a flame and burned the damsel into
cinders. When the king saw that, he hated that false witch Morgan le Fay
with all his heart, and evermore was deadly quarrel between her and
Arthur to their lives' end.




VIII

ARTHUR IS CROWNED EMPEROR AT ROME


And now again the second time there came ambassadors from Lucius
Tiberius, Emperor of Rome, demanding, under pain of war, tribute and
homage from King Arthur, and the restoration of all Gaul, which he had
conquered from the tribune Flollo.

When they had delivered their message, the king bade them withdraw while
he consulted with his knights and barons what reply to send. Then some
of the younger knights would have slain the ambassadors, saying that
their speech was a rebuke to all who heard the king insulted by it. But
when King Arthur heard that, he ordered none to touch them upon pain of
death; and sending officers, he had them taken to a noble lodging, and
there entertained with the best cheer. "And," said he, "let no dainty be
spared, for the Romans are great lords; and though their message please
me not, yet must I remember mine honor."

Then the lords and knights of the Round Table were called on to declare
their counsel--what should be done upon this matter; and Sir Cador of
Cornwall speaking first, said, "Sir, this message is the best news I
have heard for a long time, for we have been now idle and at rest for
many days, and I trust that thou wilt make sharp war upon the Romans,
wherein, I doubt not, we shall all gain honor."

"I believe well," said Arthur, "that thou art pleased, Sir Cador; but
that is scarce an answer to the Emperor of Rome, and his demand doth
grieve me sorely, for truly I will never pay him tribute; wherefore,
lords, I pray ye counsel me. Now, I have understood that Belinus and
Brennius, knights of Britain, held the Roman Empire in their hands for
many days, and also Constantine, the son of Helen, which is open
evidence, not only that we owe Rome no tribute, but that I, being
descended from them, may, of right, myself claim the empire."

Then said King Anguish of Scotland, "Sir, thou oughtest of right to be
above all other kings, for in all Christendom is there not thine equal;
and I counsel thee never to obey the Romans. For when they reigned here
they grievously distressed us, and put the land to great and heavy
burdens; and here, for my part, I swear to avenge me on them when I may,
and will furnish thee with twenty thousand men-at-arms, whom I will pay
and keep, and who shall wait on thee with me, when it shall please
thee."

Then the King of Little Britain rose and promised King Arthur thirty
thousand men; and likewise many other kings, and dukes, and barons,
promised aid--as the lord of West Wales thirty thousand men, Sir Ewaine
and his cousin thirty thousand men, and so forth; Sir Lancelot also, and
every other knight of the Round Table, promised each man a great host.

So the king, passing joyful at their courage and good will, thanked them
all heartily, and sent for the ambassadors again, to hear his answer. "I
will," said he, "that ye now go back straightway unto the Emperor your
master, and tell him that I give no heed to his words, for I have
conquered all my kingdoms by the will of God and by my own right arm,
and I am strong enough to keep them, without paying tribute to any
earthly creature. But, on the other hand, I claim both tribute and
submission from himself, and also claim the sovereignty of all his
empire, whereto I am entitled by the right of my own ancestors--sometime
kings of this land. And say to him that I will shortly come to Rome, and
by God's grace will take possession of my empire and subdue all rebels.
Wherefore, lastly, I command him and all the lords of Rome that they
forthwith pay me their homage, under pain of my chastisement and wrath."

Then he commanded his treasurers to give the ambassadors great gifts,
and defray all their charges, and appointed Sir Cador to convey them
worshipfully out of the land.

So when they returned to Rome and came before Lucius, he was sore angry
at their words, and said, "I thought this Arthur would have instantly
obeyed my orders and have served me as humbly as any other king; but
because of his fortune in Gaul, he hath grown insolent."

"Ah, lord," said one of the ambassadors, "refrain from such vain words,
for truly I and all with me were fearful at his royal majesty and angry
countenance. I fear me thou hast made a rod for thee more sharp than
thou hast counted on. He meaneth to be master of this empire; and is
another kind of man than thou supposest, and holdeth the most noble
court of all the world. We saw him on the new year's day, served at his
table by nine kings, and the noblest company of other princes, lords,
and knights that ever was in all the world; and in his person he is the
most manly-seeming man that liveth, and looketh like to conquer all the
earth."

Then Lucius sent messengers to all the subject countries of Rome, and
brought together a mighty army, and assembled sixteen kings, and many
dukes, princes, lords, and admirals, and a wondrous great multitude of
people. Fifty giants also, born of fiends, were set around him for a
body-guard. With all that host he straightway went from Rome, and passed
beyond the mountains into Gaul, and burned the towns and ravaged all the
country of that province, in rage for its submission to King Arthur.
Then he moved on towards Little Britain.

Meanwhile, King Arthur having held a parliament at York, left the realm
in charge of Sir Badewine and Sir Constantine, and crossed the sea from
Sandwich to meet Lucius. And so soon as he was landed, he sent Sir
Gawain, Sir Bors, Sir Lionel, and Sir Bedivere to the Emperor,
commanding him "to move swiftly and in haste out of his land, and, if
not, to make himself ready for battle, and not continue ravaging the
country and slaying harmless people." Anon, those noble knights attired
themselves and set forth on horseback to where they saw, in a meadow,
many silken tents of divers colors, and the Emperor's pavilion in the
midst, with a golden eagle set above it.

Then Sir Gawain and Sir Bors rode forward, leaving the other two behind
in ambush, and gave King Arthur's message. To which the Emperor replied,
"Return, and tell your lord that I am come to conquer him and all his
land."

At this, Sir Gawain burned with anger, and cried out, "I had rather than
all France that I might fight with thee alone!"

"And I also," said Sir Bors.

Then a knight named Ganius, a near cousin of the Emperor, laughed out
aloud, and said, "Lo! how these Britons boast and are full of pride,
bragging as though they bare up all the world!"

At these words, Sir Gawain could refrain no longer, but drew forth his
sword and with one blow shore off Ganius' head; then with Sir Bors, he
turned his horse and rode over waters and through woods, back to the
ambush, where Sir Lionel and Sir Bedivere were waiting. The Romans
followed fast behind them till the knights turned and stood, and then
Sir Bors smote the foremost of them through the body with a spear, and
slew him on the spot. Then came on Calibere, a huge Pavian, but Sir Bors
overthrew him also. And then the company of Sir Lionel and Sir Bedivere
brake forth from their ambush and fell on the Romans, and slew and
hewed them down, and forced them to return and flee, chasing them to
their tents.

But as they neared the camp, a great host more rushed forth, and turned
the battle backwards, and in the turmoil, Sir Bors and Sir Berel fell
into the Romans' hands. When Sir Gawain saw that, he drew his good sword
Galotine, and swore to see King Arthur's face no more if those two
knights were not delivered; and then, with good Sir Idrus, made so sore
an onslaught that the Romans fled and left Sir Bors and Sir Berel to
their friends. So the Britons returned in triumph to King Arthur, having
slain more than ten thousand Romans, and lost no man of worship from
amongst themselves.

When the Emperor Lucius heard of that discomfiture he arose, with all
his army, to crush King Arthur, and met him in the vale of Soissons.
Then speaking to all his host, he said, "Sirs, I admonish you that this
day ye fight and acquit yourselves as men; and remembering how Rome is
chief of all the earth, and mistress of the universal world, suffer not
these barbarous and savage Britons to abide our onset." At that, the
trumpets blew so loud, that the ground trembled and shook.

Then did the rival hosts draw near each other with great shoutings; and
when they closed, no tongue can tell the fury of their smiting, and the
sore struggling, wounds, and slaughter. Then King Arthur, with his
mightiest knights, rode down into the thickest of the fight, and drew
Excalibur, and slew as lightning slays for swiftness and for force. And
in the midmost crowd he met a giant, Galapas by name, and struck off
both his legs at the knee-joints; then saying, "Now art thou a better
size to deal with!" smote his head off at a second blow: and the body
killed six men in falling down.

Anon, King Arthur spied where Lucius fought and worked great deeds of
prowess with his own hands. Forthwith he rode at him, and each attacked
the other passing fiercely; till at the last, Lucius struck King Arthur
with a fearful wound across the face, and Arthur, in return, lifting up
Excalibur on high, drove it with all his force upon the Emperor's head,
shivering his helmet, crashing his head in halves, and splitting his
body to the breast. And when the Romans saw their Emperor dead, they
fled in hosts of thousands; and King Arthur and his knights, and all his
army followed them, and slew one hundred thousand men.

Then returning to the field, King Arthur rode to the place where Lucius
lay dead, and round him the kings of Egypt and Ethiopia, and seventeen
other kings, with sixty Roman senators, all noble men. All these he
ordered to be carefully embalmed with aromatic gums, and laid in leaden
coffins, covered with their shields and arms and banners. Then calling
for three senators who were taken prisoners, he said to them, "As the
ransom of your lives, I will that ye take these dead bodies and carry
them to Rome, and there present them for me, with these letters saying I
will myself be shortly there. And I suppose the Romans will beware how
they again ask tribute of me; for tell them, these dead bodies that I
send them are for the tribute they have dared to ask of me; and if they
wish for more, when I come I will pay them the rest."

So, with that charge, the three senators departed with the dead bodies,
and went to Rome; the body of the Emperor being carried in a chariot
blazoned with the arms of the empire, all alone, and the bodies of the
kings two and two in chariots following.

After the battle, King Arthur entered Lorraine, Brabant, and Flanders,
and thence, subduing all the countries as he went, passed into Germany,
and so beyond the mountains into Lombardy and Tuscany. At length he came
before a city which refused to obey him, wherefore he sat down before it
to besiege it. And after a long time thus spent, King Arthur called Sir
Florence, and told him they began to lack food for his hosts--"And not
far from hence," said he, "are great forests full of cattle belonging to
my enemies. Go then, and bring by force all that thou canst find; and
take with thee Sir Gawain, my nephew, and Sir Clegis, Sir Claremond, the
Captain of Cardiff, and a strong band."

Anon, those knights made ready, and rode over holts and hills, and
through forests and woods, till they came to a great meadow full of fair
flowers and grass, and there they rested themselves and their horses
that night. And at the dawn of the next day, Sir Gawain took his horse
and rode away from his fellows to seek some adventure. Soon he saw an
armed knight walking his horse by a wood's side, with his shield laced
to his shoulder, and no attendant with him save a page, bearing a mighty
spear; and on his shield were blazoned three gold griffins. When Sir
Gawain spied him, he put his spear in rest, and riding straight to him,
asked who he was. "A Tuscan," said he; "and thou mayest prove me when
thou wilt, for thou shalt be my prisoner ere we part."

Then said Sir Gawain, "Thou vauntest thee greatly, and speakest proud
words; yet I counsel thee, for all thy boastings, look to thyself the
best thou canst."

At that they took their spears and ran at each other with all the might
they had, and smote each other through their shields into their
shoulders; and then drawing swords smote with great strokes, till the
fire sprang out of their helms. Then was Sir Gawain enraged, and with
his good sword Galotine struck his enemy through shield and hauberk, and
splintered into piece all the precious stones of it, and made so huge a
wound that men might see both lungs and liver. At that the Tuscan,
groaning loudly, rushed on to Sir Gawain, and gave him a deep slanting
stroke, and made a mighty wound and cut a great vein asunder, so that he
bled fast. Then he cried out, "Bind thy wound quickly up, Sir knight,
for thou be-bloodest all thy horse and thy fair armor, and all the
surgeons of the world shall never staunch thy blood; for so shall it be
to whomsoever is hurt with this good sword."

Then answered Sir Gawain, "It grieveth me but little, and thy boastful
words give me no fear, for thou shalt suffer greater grief and sorrow
ere we part; but tell me quickly who can staunch this blood."

"That can I do," said the strange knight, "and will, if thou wilt aid
and succor me to become christened, and to believe in God, which now I
do require of thee upon thy manhood."

"I am content," said Sir Gawain; "and may God help me to grant all thy
wishes. But tell me first, what soughtest thou thus here alone, and of
what land art thou?"

"Sir," said the knight, "my name is Prianius, and my father is a great
prince, who hath rebelled against Rome. He is descended from Alexander
and Hector, and of our lineage also were Joshua and Maccabaeus. I am of
right the king of Alexandria, and Africa, and all the outer isles, yet I
would believe in the Lord thou worshipest, and for thy labor I will give
thee treasure enough. I was so proud in heart that I thought none my
equal, but now have I encountered with thee, who hast given me my fill
of fighting; wherefore, I pray thee, Sir knight, tell me of thyself."

"I am no knight," said Sir Gawain; "I have been brought up many years in
the wardrobe of the noble prince King Arthur, to mind his armor and
array."

"Ah," said Prianius, "if his varlets be so keen and fierce, his knights
must be passing good! Now, for the love of heaven, whether thou be
knight or knave, tell me thy name."

"By heaven!" said Gawain, "now will I tell thee the truth. My name is
Sir Gawain, and I am a knight of the Round Table."

"Now am I better pleased," said Prianius, "than if thou hadst given me
all the province of Paris the rich. I had rather have been torn by wild
horses than that any varlet should have won such victory over me as thou
hast done. But now, Sir knight, I warn thee that close by is the Duke of
Lorraine, with sixty thousand good men of war; and we had both best flee
at once, for he will find us else, and we be sorely wounded and never
likely to recover. And let my page be careful that he blow no horn, for
hard by are a hundred knights, my servants; and if they seize thee, no
ransom of gold or silver would acquit thee."

Then Sir Gawain rode over a river to save himself, and Sir Prianius
after him, and so they both fled till they came to his companions who
were in the meadow, where they spent the night. When Sir Whishard saw
Sir Gawain so hurt, he ran to him weeping, and asked him who it was had
wounded him; and Sir Gawain told him how he had fought with that
man--pointing to Prianius--who had salves to heal them both. "But I can
tell ye other tidings," said he--"that soon we must encounter many
enemies, for a great army is close to us in our front."

Then Prianius and Sir Gawain alighted and let their horses graze while
they unarmed, and when they took this armor and their clothing off, the
hot blood ran down freshly from their wounds till it was piteous to
see. But Prianius took from his page a vial filled from the four rivers
that flow out of Paradise, and anointed both their wounds with a certain
balm, and washed them with that water, and within an hour afterwards
they were both as sound and whole as ever they had been. Then, at the
sound of a trumpet, all the knights were assembled to council; and after
much talking, Prianius said, "Cease your words, for I warn you in yonder
wood ye shall find knights out of number, who will put out cattle for a
decoy to lead you on; and ye are not seven hundred!"

"Nevertheless," said Sir Gawain, "let us at once encounter them, and see
what they can do; and may the best have the victory."

Then they saw suddenly an earl named Sir Ethelwold, and the Duke of
Duchmen come leaping out of ambush of the woods in front, with many a
thousand after them, and all rode straight down to the battle. And Sir
Gawain, full of ardor and courage, comforted his knights, saying, "They
all are ours." Then the seven hundred knights, in one close company, set
spurs to their horses and began to gallop, and fiercely met their
enemies. And then were men and horses slain and overthrown on every
side, and in and out amidst them all, the knights of the Round Table
pressed and thrust, and smote down to the earth all who withstood them,
till at length the whole of them turned back and fled.

"By heaven!" said Sir Gawain, "this gladdeneth well my heart, for now
behold them as they flee! they are full seventy thousand less in number
than they were an hour ago!"

Thus was the battle quickly ended, and a great host of high lords and
knights of Lombardy and Saracens left dead upon the field. Then Sir
Gawain and his company collected a great plenty of cattle, and of gold
and silver, and all kind of treasure, and returned to King Arthur, where
he still kept the siege.

"Now God be thanked," cried he; "but who is he that standeth yonder by
himself, and seemeth not a prisoner?"

"Sir," said Sir Gawain, "he is a good man with his weapons, and hath
matched me; but cometh hither to be made a Christian. Had it not been
for his warnings, we none of us should have been here this day. I pray
thee, therefore, let him be baptized, for there can be few nobler men,
or better knights."

So Prianius was christened, and made a duke and knight of the Round
Table.

Presently afterwards, they made a last attack upon the city, and entered
by the walls on every side; and as the men were rushing to the pillage,
came the Duchess forth, with many ladies and damsels, and kneeled before
King Arthur; and besought him to receive their submission. To whom the
king made answer, with a noble countenance, "Madam, be well assured that
none shall harm ye, or your ladies; neither shall any that belong to
thee be hurt; but the Duke must abide my judgment." Then he commanded to
stay the assault and took the keys from the Duke's eldest son, who
brought them kneeling. Anon the Duke was sent a prisoner to Dover for
his life, and rents and taxes were assigned for dowry of the Duchess and
her children.

Then went he on with all his hosts, winning all towns and castles, and
wasting them that refused obedience, till he came to Viterbo. From
thence he sent to Rome, to ask the senators whether they would receive
him for their lord and governor. In answer, came out to him all the
Senate who remained alive, and the Cardinals, with a majestic retinue
and procession; and laying great treasures at his feet, they prayed him
to come in at once to Rome, and there be peaceably crowned as Emperor.
"At this next Christmas," said King Arthur, "will I be crowned, and hold
my Round Table in your city."

Anon he entered Rome, in mighty pomp and state; and after him came all
his hosts, and his knights, and princes, and great lords, arrayed in
gold and jewels, such as never were beheld before. And then was he
crowned Emperor by the Pope's hands, with all the highest solemnity that
could be made.

Then after his coronation, he abode in Rome for a season, settling his
lands and giving kingdoms to his knights and servants, to each one after
his deserving, and in such wise fashion that no man among them all
complained. Also he made many dukes and earls, and loaded all his
men-at-arms with riches and great treasures.

When all this was done, the lords and knights, and all the men of great
estate, came together before him, and said, "Noble Emperor! by the
blessing of Eternal God, thy mortal warfare is all finished, and thy
conquests all achieved; for now in all the world is none so great and
mighty as to dare make war with thee. Wherefore we beseech and heartily
pray thee of thy noble grace, to turn thee homeward, and give us also
leave to see our wives and homes again, for now we have been from them a
long season, and all thy journey is completed with great honor and
worship."

"Ye say well," replied he, "and to tempt God is no wisdom; therefore
make ready in all haste, and turn we home to England."

So King Arthur returned with his knights and lords and armies, in great
triumph and joy, through all the countries he had conquered, and
commanded that no man, upon pain of death, should rob or do any violence
by the way. And crossing the sea, he came at length to Sandwich, where
Queen Guinevere received him, and made great joy at his arrival. And
through all the realm of Britain was there such rejoicing as no tongue
can tell.
