Chapter XXXV.
A GASCON A MATCH FOR CUPID


The evening so impatiently waited for by Porthos and by D'Artagnan at
last arrived.

As was his custom, D'Artagnan presented himself at Milady's at about
nine o'clock. He found her in a charming humor. Never had he been so
well received. Our Gascon knew, by the first glance of his eye, that
his billet had been delivered, and that this billet had had its effect.

Kitty entered to bring some sherbet. Her mistress put on a charming
face, and smiled on her graciously; but alas! the poor girl was so sad
that she did not even notice Milady's condescension.

D'Artagnan looked at the two women, one after the other, and was forced
to acknowledge that in his opinion Dame Nature had made a mistake in
their formation. To the great lady she had given a heart vile and
venal; to the _soubrette_ she had given the heart of a duchess.

At ten o'clock Milady began to appear restless. D'Artagnan knew what
she wanted. She looked at the clock, rose, reseated herself, smiled at
D'Artagnan with an air which said, "You are very amiable, no doubt, but
you would be _charming_ if you would only depart."

D'Artagnan rose and took his hat; Milady gave him her hand to kiss. The
young man felt her press his hand, and comprehended that this was a
sentiment, not of coquetry, but of gratitude because of his departure.

"She loves him devilishly," he murmured. Then he went out.

This time Kitty was nowhere waiting for him; neither in the
antechamber, nor in the corridor, nor beneath the great door. It was
necessary that D'Artagnan should find alone the staircase and the
little chamber. She heard him enter, but she did not raise her head.
The young man went to her and took her hands; then she sobbed aloud.

As D'Artagnan had presumed, on receiving his letter, Milady in a
delirium of joy had told her servant everything; and by way of
recompense for the manner in which she had this time executed the
commission, she had given Kitty a purse.

Returning to her own room, Kitty had thrown the purse into a corner,
where it lay open, disgorging three or four gold pieces on the carpet.
The poor girl, under the caresses of D'Artagnan, lifted her head.
D'Artagnan himself was frightened by the change in her countenance. She
joined her hands with a suppliant air, but without venturing to speak a
word. As little sensitive as was the heart of D'Artagnan, he was
touched by this mute sorrow; but he held too tenaciously to his
projects, above all to this one, to change the program which he had
laid out in advance. He did not therefore allow her any hope that he
would flinch; only he represented his action as one of simple
vengeance.

For the rest this vengeance was very easy; for Milady, doubtless to
conceal her blushes from her lover, had ordered Kitty to extinguish all
the lights in the apartment, and even in the little chamber itself.
Before daybreak M. de Wardes must take his departure, still in
obscurity.

Presently they heard Milady retire to her room. D'Artagnan slipped into
the wardrobe. Hardly was he concealed when the little bell sounded.
Kitty went to her mistress, and did not leave the door open; but the
partition was so thin that one could hear nearly all that passed
between the two women.

Milady seemed overcome with joy, and made Kitty repeat the smallest
details of the pretended interview of the _soubrette_ with De Wardes
when he received the letter; how he had responded; what was the
expression of his face; if he seemed very amorous. And to all these
questions poor Kitty, forced to put on a pleasant face, responded in a
stifled voice whose dolorous accent her mistress did not however
remark, solely because happiness is egotistical.

Finally, as the hour for her interview with the count approached,
Milady had everything about her darkened, and ordered Kitty to return
to her own chamber, and introduce De Wardes whenever he presented
himself.

Kitty's detention was not long. Hardly had D'Artagnan seen, through a
crevice in his closet, that the whole apartment was in obscurity, than
he slipped out of his concealment, at the very moment when Kitty
reclosed the door of communication.

"What is that noise?" demanded Milady.

"It is I," said D'Artagnan in a subdued voice, "I, the Comte de
Wardes."

"Oh, my God, my God!" murmured Kitty, "he has not even waited for the
hour he himself named!"

"Well," said Milady, in a trembling voice, "why do you not enter?
Count, Count," added she, "you know that I wait for you."

At this appeal D'Artagnan drew Kitty quietly away, and slipped into the
chamber.

If rage or sorrow ever torture the heart, it is when a lover receives
under a name which is not his own protestations of love addressed to
his happy rival. D'Artagnan was in a dolorous situation which he had
not foreseen. Jealousy gnawed his heart; and he suffered almost as much
as poor Kitty, who at that very moment was crying in the next chamber.

"Yes, Count," said Milady, in her softest voice, and pressing his hand
in her own, "I am happy in the love which your looks and your words
have expressed to me every time we have met. I also-I love you. Oh,
tomorrow, tomorrow, I must have some pledge from you which will prove
that you think of me; and that you may not forget me, take this!" and
she slipped a ring from her finger onto D'Artagnan's. D'Artagnan
remembered having seen this ring on the finger of Milady; it was a
magnificent sapphire, encircled with brilliants.

The first movement of D'Artagnan was to return it, but Milady added,
"No, no! Keep that ring for love of me. Besides, in accepting it," she
added, in a voice full of emotion, "you render me a much greater
service than you imagine."

"This woman is full of mysteries," murmured D'Artagnan to himself. At
that instant he felt himself ready to reveal all. He even opened his
mouth to tell Milady who he was, and with what a revengeful purpose he
had come; but she added, "Poor angel, whom that monster of a Gascon
barely failed to kill."

The monster was himself.

"Oh," continued Milady, "do your wounds still make you suffer?"

"Yes, much," said D'Artagnan, who did not well know how to answer.

"Be tranquil," murmured Milady; "I will avenge you-and cruelly!"

"_Peste!_" said D'Artagnan to himself, "the moment for confidences has
not yet come."

It took some time for D'Artagnan to resume this little dialogue; but
then all the ideas of vengeance which he had brought with him had
completely vanished. This woman exercised over him an unaccountable
power; he hated and adored her at the same time. He would not have
believed that two sentiments so opposite could dwell in the same heart,
and by their union constitute a passion so strange, and as it were,
diabolical.

Presently it sounded one o'clock. It was necessary to separate.
D'Artagnan at the moment of quitting Milady felt only the liveliest
regret at the parting; and as they addressed each other in a
reciprocally passionate adieu, another interview was arranged for the
following week.

Poor Kitty hoped to speak a few words to D'Artagnan when he passed
through her chamber; but Milady herself reconducted him through the
darkness, and only quit him at the staircase.

The next morning D'Artagnan ran to find Athos. He was engaged in an
adventure so singular that he wished for counsel. He therefore told him
all.

"Your Milady," said he, "appears to be an infamous creature, but not
the less you have done wrong to deceive her. In one fashion or another
you have a terrible enemy on your hands."

While thus speaking Athos regarded with attention the sapphire set with
diamonds which had taken, on D'Artagnan's finger, the place of the
queen's ring, carefully kept in a casket.

"You notice my ring?" said the Gascon, proud to display so rich a gift
in the eyes of his friends.

"Yes," said Athos, "it reminds me of a family jewel."

"It is beautiful, is it not?" said D'Artagnan.

"Yes," said Athos, "magnificent. I did not think two sapphires of such
a fine water existed. Have you traded it for your diamond?"

"No. It is a gift from my beautiful Englishwoman, or rather
Frenchwoman-for I am convinced she was born in France, though I have
not questioned her."

"That ring comes from Milady?" cried Athos, with a voice in which it
was easy to detect strong emotion.

"Her very self; she gave it me last night. Here it is," replied
D'Artagnan, taking it from his finger.

Athos examined it and became very pale. He tried it on his left hand;
it fit his finger as if made for it.

A shade of anger and vengeance passed across the usually calm brow of
this gentleman.

"It is impossible it can be she," said he. "How could this ring come
into the hands of Milady Clarik? And yet it is difficult to suppose
such a resemblance should exist between two jewels."

"Do you know this ring?" said D'Artagnan.

"I thought I did," replied Athos; "but no doubt I was mistaken." And he
returned D'Artagnan the ring without, however, ceasing to look at it.

"Pray, D'Artagnan," said Athos, after a minute, "either take off that
ring or turn the mounting inside; it recalls such cruel recollections
that I shall have no head to converse with you. Don't ask me for
counsel; don't tell me you are perplexed what to do. But stop! let me
look at that sapphire again; the one I mentioned to you had one of its
faces scratched by accident."

D'Artagnan took off the ring, giving it again to Athos.

Athos started. "Look," said he, "is it not strange?" and he pointed out
to D'Artagnan the scratch he had remembered.

"But from whom did this ring come to you, Athos?"

"From my mother, who inherited it from her mother. As I told you, it is
an old family jewel."

"And you-sold it?" asked D'Artagnan, hesitatingly.

"No," replied Athos, with a singular smile. "I gave it away in a night
of love, as it has been given to you."

D'Artagnan became pensive in his turn; it appeared as if there were
abysses in Milady's soul whose depths were dark and unknown. He took
back the ring, but put it in his pocket and not on his finger.

"D'Artagnan," said Athos, taking his hand, "you know I love you; if I
had a son I could not love him better. Take my advice, renounce this
woman. I do not know her, but a sort of intuition tells me she is a
lost creature, and that there is something fatal about her."

"You are right," said D'Artagnan; "I will have done with her. I own
that this woman terrifies me."

"Shall you have the courage?" said Athos.

"I shall," replied D'Artagnan, "and instantly."

"In truth, my young friend, you will act rightly," said the gentleman,
pressing the Gascon's hand with an affection almost paternal; "and God
grant that this woman, who has scarcely entered into your life, may not
leave a terrible trace in it!" And Athos bowed to D'Artagnan like a man
who wishes it understood that he would not be sorry to be left alone
with his thoughts.

On reaching home D'Artagnan found Kitty waiting for him. A month of
fever could not have changed her more than this one night of
sleeplessness and sorrow.

She was sent by her mistress to the false De Wardes. Her mistress was
mad with love, intoxicated with joy. She wished to know when her lover
would meet her a second night; and poor Kitty, pale and trembling,
awaited D'Artagnan's reply. The counsels of his friend, joined to the
cries of his own heart, made him determine, now his pride was saved and
his vengeance satisfied, not to see Milady again. As a reply, he wrote
the following letter:

Do not depend upon me, madame, for the next meeting. Since my
convalescence I have so many affairs of this kind on my hands that I am
forced to regulate them a little. When your turn comes, I shall have
the honor to inform you of it. I kiss your hands.


COMTE DE WARDES


Not a word about the sapphire. Was the Gascon determined to keep it as
a weapon against Milady, or else, let us be frank, did he not reserve
the sapphire as a last resource for his outfit? It would be wrong to
judge the actions of one period from the point of view of another. That
which would now be considered as disgraceful to a gentleman was at that
time quite a simple and natural affair, and the younger sons of the
best families were frequently supported by their mistresses. D'Artagnan
gave the open letter to Kitty, who at first was unable to comprehend
it, but who became almost wild with joy on reading it a second time.
She could scarcely believe in her happiness; and D'Artagnan was forced
to renew with the living voice the assurances which he had written. And
whatever might be-considering the violent character of Milady-the
danger which the poor girl incurred in giving this billet to her
mistress, she ran back to the Place Royale as fast as her legs could
carry her.

The heart of the best woman is pitiless toward the sorrows of a rival.

Milady opened the letter with eagerness equal to Kitty's in bringing
it; but at the first words she read she became livid. She crushed the
paper in her hand, and turning with flashing eyes upon Kitty, she
cried, "What is this letter?"

"The answer to Madame's," replied Kitty, all in a tremble.

"Impossible!" cried Milady. "It is impossible a gentleman could have
written such a letter to a woman." Then all at once, starting, she
cried, "My God! can he have-" and she stopped. She ground her teeth;
she was of the color of ashes. She tried to go toward the window for
air, but she could only stretch forth her arms; her legs failed her,
and she sank into an armchair. Kitty, fearing she was ill, hastened
toward her and was beginning to open her dress; but Milady started up,
pushing her away. "What do you want with me?" said she, "and why do you
place your hand on me?"

"I thought that Madame was ill, and I wished to bring her help,"
responded the maid, frightened at the terrible expression which had
come over her mistress's face.

"I faint? I? I? Do you take me for half a woman? When I am insulted I
do not faint; I avenge myself!"

And she made a sign for Kitty to leave the room.




Chapter XXXVI.
DREAM OF VENGEANCE


That evening Milady gave orders that when M. d'Artagnan came as usual,
he should be immediately admitted; but he did not come.

The next day Kitty went to see the young man again, and related to him
all that had passed on the preceding evening. D'Artagnan smiled; this
jealous anger of Milady was his revenge.

That evening Milady was still more impatient than on the preceding
evening. She renewed the order relative to the Gascon; but as before
she expected him in vain.

The next morning, when Kitty presented herself at D'Artagnan's, she was
no longer joyous and alert as on the two preceding days; but on the
contrary sad as death.

D'Artagnan asked the poor girl what was the matter with her; but she,
as her only reply, drew a letter from her pocket and gave it to him.

This letter was in Milady's handwriting; only this time it was
addressed to M. d'Artagnan, and not to M. de Wardes.

He opened it and read as follows:

DEAR M. D'ARTAGNAN, It is wrong thus to neglect your friends,
particularly at the moment you are about to leave them for so long a
time. My brother-in-law and myself expected you yesterday and the day
before, but in vain. Will it be the same this evening?


Your very grateful,
MILADY CLARIK


"That's all very simple," said D'Artagnan; "I expected this letter. My
credit rises by the fall of that of the Comte de Wardes."

"And will you go?" asked Kitty.

"Listen to me, my dear girl," said the Gascon, who sought for an excuse
in his own eyes for breaking the promise he had made Athos; "you must
understand it would be impolitic not to accept such a positive
invitation. Milady, not seeing me come again, would not be able to
understand what could cause the interruption of my visits, and might
suspect something; who could say how far the vengeance of such a woman
would go?"

"Oh, my God!" said Kitty, "you know how to represent things in such a
way that you are always in the right. You are going now to pay your
court to her again, and if this time you succeed in pleasing her in
your own name and with your own face, it will be much worse than
before."

Instinct made poor Kitty guess a part of what was to happen. D'Artagnan
reassured her as well as he could, and promised to remain insensible to
the seductions of Milady.

He desired Kitty to tell her mistress that he could not be more
grateful for her kindnesses than he was, and that he would be obedient
to her orders. He did not dare to write for fear of not being able-to
such experienced eyes as those of Milady-to disguise his writing
sufficiently.

As nine o'clock sounded, D'Artagnan was at the Place Royale. It was
evident that the servants who waited in the antechamber were warned,
for as soon as D'Artagnan appeared, before even he had asked if Milady
were visible, one of them ran to announce him.

"Show him in," said Milady, in a quick tone, but so piercing that
D'Artagnan heard her in the antechamber.

He was introduced.

"I am at home to nobody," said Milady; "observe, to _nobody_."

The servant went out.

D'Artagnan cast an inquiring glance at Milady. She was pale, and looked
fatigued, either from tears or want of sleep. The number of lights had
been intentionally diminished, but the young woman could not conceal
the traces of the fever which had devoured her for two days.

D'Artagnan approached her with his usual gallantry. She then made an
extraordinary effort to receive him, but never did a more distressed
countenance give the lie to a more amiable smile.

To the questions which D'Artagnan put concerning her health, she
replied, "Bad, very bad."

"Then," replied he, "my visit is ill-timed; you, no doubt, stand in
need of repose, and I will withdraw."

"No, no!" said Milady. "On the contrary, stay, Monsieur d'Artagnan;
your agreeable company will divert me."

"Oh, oh!" thought D'Artagnan. "She has never been so kind before. On
guard!"

Milady assumed the most agreeable air possible, and conversed with more
than her usual brilliancy. At the same time the fever, which for an
instant abandoned her, returned to give luster to her eyes, color to
her cheeks, and vermillion to her lips. D'Artagnan was again in the
presence of the Circe who had before surrounded him with her
enchantments. His love, which he believed to be extinct but which was
only asleep, awoke again in his heart. Milady smiled, and D'Artagnan
felt that he could damn himself for that smile. There was a moment at
which he felt something like remorse.

By degrees, Milady became more communicative. She asked D'Artagnan if
he had a mistress.

"Alas!" said D'Artagnan, with the most sentimental air he could assume,
"can you be cruel enough to put such a question to me-to me, who, from
the moment I saw you, have only breathed and sighed through you and for
you?"

Milady smiled with a strange smile.

"Then you love me?" said she.

"Have I any need to tell you so? Have you not perceived it?"

"It may be; but you know the more hearts are worth the capture, the
more difficult they are to be won."

"Oh, difficulties do not affright me," said D'Artagnan. "I shrink
before nothing but impossibilities."

"Nothing is impossible," replied Milady, "to true love."

"Nothing, madame?"

"Nothing," replied Milady.

"The devil!" thought D'Artagnan. "The note is changed. Is she going to
fall in love with me, by chance, this fair inconstant; and will she be
disposed to give me myself another sapphire like that which she gave me
for De Wardes?"

D'Artagnan rapidly drew his seat nearer to Milady's.

"Well, now," she said, "let us see what you would do to prove this love
of which you speak."

"All that could be required of me. Order; I am ready."

"For everything?"

"For everything," cried D'Artagnan, who knew beforehand that he had not
much to risk in engaging himself thus.

"Well, now let us talk a little seriously," said Milady, in her turn
drawing her armchair nearer to D'Artagnan's chair.

"I am all attention, madame," said he.

Milady remained thoughtful and undecided for a moment; then, as if
appearing to have formed a resolution, she said, "I have an enemy."

"You, madame!" said D'Artagnan, affecting surprise; "is that possible,
my God?-good and beautiful as you are!"

"A mortal enemy."

"Indeed!"

"An enemy who has insulted me so cruelly that between him and me it is
war to the death. May I reckon on you as an auxiliary?"

D'Artagnan at once perceived the ground which the vindictive creature
wished to reach.

"You may, madame," said he, with emphasis. "My arm and my life belong
to you, like my love."

"Then," said Milady, "since you are as generous as you are loving-"

She stopped.

"Well?" demanded D'Artagnan.

"Well," replied Milady, after a moment of silence, "from the present
time, cease to talk of impossibilities."

"Do not overwhelm me with happiness," cried D'Artagnan, throwing
himself on his knees, and covering with kisses the hands abandoned to
him.

"Avenge me of that infamous De Wardes," said Milady, between her teeth,
"and I shall soon know how to get rid of you-you double idiot, you
animated sword blade!"

"Fall voluntarily into my arms, hypocritical and dangerous woman," said
D'Artagnan, likewise to himself, "after having abused me with such
effrontery, and afterward I will laugh at you with him whom you wish me
to kill."

D'Artagnan lifted up his head.

"I am ready," said he.

"You have understood me, then, dear Monsieur d'Artagnan," said Milady.

"I could interpret one of your looks."

"Then you would employ for me your arm which has already acquired so
much renown?"

"Instantly!"

"But on my part," said Milady, "how should I repay such a service? I
know these lovers. They are men who do nothing for nothing."

"You know the only reply that I desire," said D'Artagnan, "the only one
worthy of you and of me!"

And he drew nearer to her.

She scarcely resisted.

"Interested man!" cried she, smiling.

"Ah," cried D'Artagnan, really carried away by the passion this woman
had the power to kindle in his heart, "ah, that is because my happiness
appears so impossible to me; and I have such fear that it should fly
away from me like a dream that I pant to make a reality of it."

"Well, merit this pretended happiness, then!"

"I am at your orders," said D'Artagnan.

"Quite certain?" said Milady, with a last doubt.

"Only name to me the base man that has brought tears into your
beautiful eyes!"

"Who told you that I had been weeping?" said she.

"It appeared to me-"

"Such women as I never weep," said Milady.

"So much the better! Come, tell me his name!"

"Remember that his name is all my secret."

"Yet I must know his name."

"Yes, you must; see what confidence I have in you!"

"You overwhelm me with joy. What is his name?"

"You know him."

"Indeed."

"Yes."

"It is surely not one of my friends?" replied D'Artagnan, affecting
hesitation in order to make her believe him ignorant.

"If it were one of your friends you would hesitate, then?" cried
Milady; and a threatening glance darted from her eyes.

"Not if it were my own brother!" cried D'Artagnan, as if carried away
by his enthusiasm.

Our Gascon promised this without risk, for he knew all that was meant.

"I love your devotedness," said Milady.

"Alas, do you love nothing else in me?" asked D'Artagnan.

"I love you also, _you!_" said she, taking his hand.

The warm pressure made D'Artagnan tremble, as if by the touch that
fever which consumed Milady attacked himself.

"You love me, you!" cried he. "Oh, if that were so, I should lose my
reason!"

And he folded her in his arms. She made no effort to remove her lips
from his kisses; only she did not respond to them. Her lips were cold;
it appeared to D'Artagnan that he had embraced a statue.

He was not the less intoxicated with joy, electrified by love. He
almost believed in the tenderness of Milady; he almost believed in the
crime of De Wardes. If De Wardes had at that moment been under his
hand, he would have killed him.

Milady seized the occasion.

"His name is-" said she, in her turn.

"De Wardes; I know it," cried D'Artagnan.

"And how do you know it?" asked Milady, seizing both his hands, and
endeavoring to read with her eyes to the bottom of his heart.

D'Artagnan felt he had allowed himself to be carried away, and that he
had committed an error.

"Tell me, tell me, tell me, I say," repeated Milady, "how do you know
it?"

"How do I know it?" said D'Artagnan.

"Yes."

"I know it because yesterday Monsieur de Wardes, in a saloon where I
was, showed a ring which he said he had received from you."

"Wretch!" cried Milady.

The epithet, as may be easily understood, resounded to the very bottom
of D'Artagnan's heart.

"Well?" continued she.

"Well, I will avenge you of this wretch," replied D'Artagnan, giving
himself the airs of Don Japhet of Armenia.

"Thanks, my brave friend!" cried Milady; "and when shall I be avenged?"

"Tomorrow-immediately-when you please!"

Milady was about to cry out, "Immediately," but she reflected that such
precipitation would not be very gracious toward D'Artagnan.

Besides, she had a thousand precautions to take, a thousand counsels to
give to her defender, in order that he might avoid explanations with
the count before witnesses. All this was answered by an expression of
D'Artagnan's. "Tomorrow," said he, "you will be avenged, or I shall be
dead."

"No," said she, "you will avenge me; but you will not be dead. He is a
coward."

"With women, perhaps; but not with men. I know something of him."

"But it seems you had not much reason to complain of your fortune in
your contest with him."

"Fortune is a courtesan; favorable yesterday, she may turn her back
tomorrow."

"Which means that you now hesitate?"

"No, I do not hesitate; God forbid! But would it be just to allow me to
go to a possible death without having given me at least something more
than hope?"

Milady answered by a glance which said, "Is that all?-speak, then." And
then accompanying the glance with explanatory words, "That is but too
just," said she, tenderly.

"Oh, you are an angel!" exclaimed the young man.

"Then all is agreed?" said she.

"Except that which I ask of you, dear love."

"But when I assure you that you may rely on my tenderness?"

"I cannot wait till tomorrow."

"Silence! I hear my brother. It will be useless for him to find you
here."

She rang the bell and Kitty appeared.

"Go out this way," said she, opening a small private door, "and come
back at eleven o'clock; we will then terminate this conversation. Kitty
will conduct you to my chamber."

The poor girl almost fainted at hearing these words.

"Well, mademoiselle, what are you thinking about, standing there like a
statue? Do as I bid you: show the chevalier out; and this evening at
eleven o'clock-you have heard what I said."

"It appears that these appointments are all made for eleven o'clock,"
thought D'Artagnan; "that's a settled custom."

Milady held out her hand to him, which he kissed tenderly.

"But," said he, as he retired as quickly as possible from the
reproaches of Kitty, "I must not play the fool. This woman is certainly
a great liar. I must take care."




Chapter XXXVII.
MILADY'S SECRET


D'Artagnan left the hotel instead of going up at once to Kitty's
chamber, as she endeavored to persuade him to do-and that for two
reasons: the first, because by this means he should escape reproaches,
recriminations, and prayers; the second, because he was not sorry to
have an opportunity of reading his own thoughts and endeavoring, if
possible, to fathom those of this woman.

What was most clear in the matter was that D'Artagnan loved Milady like
a madman, and that she did not love him at all. In an instant
D'Artagnan perceived that the best way in which he could act would be
to go home and write Milady a long letter, in which he would confess to
her that he and De Wardes were, up to the present moment absolutely the
same, and that consequently he could not undertake, without committing
suicide, to kill the Comte de Wardes. But he also was spurred on by a
ferocious desire of vengeance. He wished to subdue this woman in his
own name; and as this vengeance appeared to him to have a certain
sweetness in it, he could not make up his mind to renounce it.

He walked six or seven times round the Place Royale, turning at every
ten steps to look at the light in Milady's apartment, which was to be
seen through the blinds. It was evident that this time the young woman
was not in such haste to retire to her apartment as she had been the
first.

At length the light disappeared. With this light was extinguished the
last irresolution in the heart of D'Artagnan. He recalled to his mind
the details of the first night, and with a beating heart and a brain on
fire he re-entered the hotel and flew toward Kitty's chamber.

The poor girl, pale as death and trembling in all her limbs, wished to
delay her lover; but Milady, with her ear on the watch, had heard the
noise D'Artagnan had made, and opening the door, said, "Come in."

All this was of such incredible immodesty, of such monstrous
effrontery, that D'Artagnan could scarcely believe what he saw or what
he heard. He imagined himself to be drawn into one of those fantastic
intrigues one meets in dreams. He, however, darted not the less quickly
toward Milady, yielding to that magnetic attraction which the loadstone
exercises over iron.

As the door closed after them Kitty rushed toward it. Jealousy, fury,
offended pride, all the passions in short that dispute the heart of an
outraged woman in love, urged her to make a revelation; but she
reflected that she would be totally lost if she confessed having
assisted in such a machination, and above all, that D'Artagnan would
also be lost to her forever. This last thought of love counseled her to
make this last sacrifice.

D'Artagnan, on his part, had gained the summit of all his wishes. It
was no longer a rival who was beloved; it was himself who was
apparently beloved. A secret voice whispered to him, at the bottom of
his heart, that he was but an instrument of vengeance, that he was only
caressed till he had given death; but pride, but self-love, but madness
silenced this voice and stifled its murmurs. And then our Gascon, with
that large quantity of conceit which we know he possessed, compared
himself with De Wardes, and asked himself why, after all, he should not
be beloved for himself?

He was absorbed entirely by the sensations of the moment. Milady was no
longer for him that woman of fatal intentions who had for a moment
terrified him; she was an ardent, passionate mistress, abandoning
herself to love which she also seemed to feel. Two hours thus glided
away. When the transports of the two lovers were calmer, Milady, who
had not the same motives for forgetfulness that D'Artagnan had, was the
first to return to reality, and asked the young man if the means which
were on the morrow to bring on the encounter between him and De Wardes
were already arranged in his mind.

But D'Artagnan, whose ideas had taken quite another course, forgot
himself like a fool, and answered gallantly that it was too late to
think about duels and sword thrusts.

This coldness toward the only interests that occupied her mind
terrified Milady, whose questions became more pressing.

Then D'Artagnan, who had never seriously thought of this impossible
duel, endeavored to turn the conversation; but he could not succeed.
Milady kept him within the limits she had traced beforehand with her
irresistible spirit and her iron will.

D'Artagnan fancied himself very cunning when advising Milady to
renounce, by pardoning De Wardes, the furious projects she had formed.

But at the first word the young woman started, and exclaimed in a
sharp, bantering tone, which sounded strangely in the darkness, "Are
you afraid, dear Monsieur d'Artagnan?"

"You cannot think so, dear love!" replied D'Artagnan; "but now, suppose
this poor Comte de Wardes were less guilty than you think him?"

"At all events," said Milady, seriously, "he has deceived me, and from
the moment he deceived me, he merited death."

"He shall die, then, since you condemn him!" said D'Artagnan, in so
firm a tone that it appeared to Milady an undoubted proof of devotion.
This reassured her.

We cannot say how long the night seemed to Milady, but D'Artagnan
believed it to be hardly two hours before the daylight peeped through
the window blinds, and invaded the chamber with its paleness. Seeing
D'Artagnan about to leave her, Milady recalled his promise to avenge
her on the Comte de Wardes.

"I am quite ready," said D'Artagnan; "but in the first place I should
like to be certain of one thing."

"And what is that?" asked Milady.

"That is, whether you really love me?"

"I have given you proof of that, it seems to me."

"And I am yours, body and soul!"

"Thanks, my brave lover; but as you are satisfied of my love, you must,
in your turn, satisfy me of yours. Is it not so?"

"Certainly; but if you love me as much as you say," replied D'Artagnan,
"do you not entertain a little fear on my account?"

"What have I to fear?"

"Why, that I may be dangerously wounded-killed even."

"Impossible!" cried Milady, "you are such a valiant man, and such an
expert swordsman."

"You would not, then, prefer a method," resumed D'Artagnan, "which
would equally avenge you while rendering the combat useless?"

Milady looked at her lover in silence. The pale light of the first rays
of day gave to her clear eyes a strangely frightful expression.

"Really," said she, "I believe you now begin to hesitate."

"No, I do not hesitate; but I really pity this poor Comte de Wardes,
since you have ceased to love him. I think that a man must be so
severely punished by the loss of your love that he stands in need of no
other chastisement."

"Who told you that I loved him?" asked Milady, sharply.

"At least, I am now at liberty to believe, without too much fatuity,
that you love another," said the young man, in a caressing tone, "and I
repeat that I am really interested for the count."

"You?" asked Milady.

"Yes, I."

"And why _you?_"

"Because I alone know-"

"What?"

"That he is far from being, or rather having been, so guilty toward you
as he appears."

"Indeed!" said Milady, in an anxious tone; "explain yourself, for I
really cannot tell what you mean."

And she looked at D'Artagnan, who embraced her tenderly, with eyes
which seemed to burn themselves away.

"Yes; I am a man of honor," said D'Artagnan, determined to come to an
end, "and since your love is mine, and I am satisfied I possess it-for
I do possess it, do I not?"

"Entirely; go on."

"Well, I feel as if transformed-a confession weighs on my mind."

"A confession!"

"If I had the least doubt of your love I would not make it, but you
love me, my beautiful mistress, do you not?"

"Without doubt."

"Then if through excess of love I have rendered myself culpable toward
you, you will pardon me?"

"Perhaps."

D'Artagnan tried with his sweetest smile to touch his lips to Milady's,
but she evaded him.

"This confession," said she, growing paler, "what is this confession?"

"You gave De Wardes a meeting on Thursday last in this very room, did
you not?"

"No, no! It is not true," said Milady, in a tone of voice so firm, and
with a countenance so unchanged, that if D'Artagnan had not been in
such perfect possession of the fact, he would have doubted.

"Do not lie, my angel," said D'Artagnan, smiling; "that would be
useless."

"What do you mean? Speak! you kill me."

"Be satisfied; you are not guilty toward me, and I have already
pardoned you."

"What next? what next?"

"De Wardes cannot boast of anything."

"How is that? You told me yourself that that ring-"

"That ring I have! The Comte de Wardes of Thursday and the D'Artagnan
of today are the same person."

The imprudent young man expected a surprise, mixed with shame-a slight
storm which would resolve itself into tears; but he was strangely
deceived, and his error was not of long duration.

Pale and trembling, Milady repulsed D'Artagnan's attempted embrace by a
violent blow on the chest, as she sprang out of bed.

It was almost broad daylight.

D'Artagnan detained her by her night dress of fine India linen, to
implore her pardon; but she, with a strong movement, tried to escape.
Then the cambric was torn from her beautiful shoulders; and on one of
those lovely shoulders, round and white, D'Artagnan recognized, with
inexpressible astonishment, the _fleur-de-lis_-that indelible mark
which the hand of the infamous executioner had imprinted.

"Great God!" cried D'Artagnan, loosing his hold of her dress, and
remaining mute, motionless, and frozen.

But Milady felt herself denounced even by his terror. He had doubtless
seen all. The young man now knew her secret, her terrible secret-the
secret she concealed even from her maid with such care, the secret of
which all the world was ignorant, except himself.

She turned upon him, no longer like a furious woman, but like a wounded
panther.

"Ah, wretch!" cried she, "you have basely betrayed me, and still more,
you have my secret! You shall die."

And she flew to a little inlaid casket which stood upon the dressing
table, opened it with a feverish and trembling hand, drew from it a
small poniard, with a golden haft and a sharp thin blade, and then
threw herself with a bound upon D'Artagnan.

Although the young man was brave, as we know, he was terrified at that
wild countenance, those terribly dilated pupils, those pale cheeks, and
those bleeding lips. He recoiled to the other side of the room as he
would have done from a serpent which was crawling toward him, and his
sword coming in contact with his nervous hand, he drew it almost
unconsciously from the scabbard. But without taking any heed of the
sword, Milady endeavored to get near enough to him to stab him, and did
not stop till she felt the sharp point at her throat.

She then tried to seize the sword with her hands; but D'Artagnan kept
it free from her grasp, and presenting the point, sometimes at her
eyes, sometimes at her breast, compelled her to glide behind the
bedstead, while he aimed at making his retreat by the door which led to
Kitty's apartment.

Milady during this time continued to strike at him with horrible fury,
screaming in a formidable way.

As all this, however, bore some resemblance to a duel, D'Artagnan began
to recover himself little by little.

"Well, beautiful lady, very well," said he; "but, _pardieu_, if you
don't calm yourself, I will design a second _fleur-de-lis_ upon one of
those pretty cheeks!"

"Scoundrel, infamous scoundrel!" howled Milady.

But D'Artagnan, still keeping on the defensive, drew near to Kitty's
door. At the noise they made, she in overturning the furniture in her
efforts to get at him, he in screening himself behind the furniture to
keep out of her reach, Kitty opened the door. D'Artagnan, who had
unceasingly maneuvered to gain this point, was not at more than three
paces from it. With one spring he flew from the chamber of Milady into
that of the maid, and quick as lightning, he slammed to the door, and
placed all his weight against it, while Kitty pushed the bolts.

Then Milady attempted to tear down the doorcase, with a strength
apparently above that of a woman; but finding she could not accomplish
this, she in her fury stabbed at the door with her poniard, the point
of which repeatedly glittered through the wood. Every blow was
accompanied with terrible imprecations.

"Quick, Kitty, quick!" said D'Artagnan, in a low voice, as soon as the
bolts were fast, "let me get out of the hotel; for if we leave her time
to turn round, she will have me killed by the servants."

"But you can't go out so," said Kitty; "you are naked."

"That's true," said D'Artagnan, then first thinking of the costume he
found himself in, "that's true. But dress me as well as you are able,
only make haste; think, my dear girl, it's life and death!"

Kitty was but too well aware of that. In a turn of the hand she muffled
him up in a flowered robe, a large hood, and a cloak. She gave him some
slippers, in which he placed his naked feet, and then conducted him
down the stairs. It was time. Milady had already rung her bell, and
roused the whole hotel. The porter was drawing the cord at the moment
Milady cried from her window, "Don't open!"

The young man fled while she was still threatening him with an impotent
gesture. The moment she lost sight of him, Milady tumbled fainting into
her chamber.




Chapter XXXVIII.
HOW, WITHOUT INCOMMDING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURES HIS EQUIPMENT


D'Artagnan was so completely bewildered that without taking any heed of
what might become of Kitty he ran at full speed across half Paris, and
did not stop till he came to Athos's door. The confusion of his mind,
the terror which spurred him on, the cries of some of the patrol who
started in pursuit of him, and the hooting of the people who,
notwithstanding the early hour, were going to their work, only made him
precipitate his course.

He crossed the court, ran up the two flights to Athos's apartment, and
knocked at the door enough to break it down.

Grimaud came, rubbing his half-open eyes, to answer this noisy summons,
and D'Artagnan sprang with such violence into the room as nearly to
overturn the astonished lackey.

In spite of his habitual silence, the poor lad this time found his
speech.

"Holloa, there!" cried he; "what do you want, you strumpet? What's your
business here, you hussy?"

D'Artagnan threw off his hood, and disengaged his hands from the folds
of the cloak. At sight of the mustaches and the naked sword, the poor
devil perceived he had to deal with a man. He then concluded it must be
an assassin.

"Help! murder! help!" cried he.

"Hold your tongue, you stupid fellow!" said the young man; "I am
D'Artagnan; don't you know me? Where is your master?"

"You, Monsieur d'Artagnan!" cried Grimaud, "impossible."

"Grimaud," said Athos, coming out of his apartment in a dressing gown,
"Grimaud, I thought I heard you permitting yourself to speak?"

"Ah, monsieur, it is-"

"Silence!"

Grimaud contented himself with pointing D'Artagnan out to his master
with his finger.

Athos recognized his comrade, and phlegmatic as he was, he burst into a
laugh which was quite excused by the strange masquerade before his
eyes-petticoats falling over his shoes, sleeves tucked up, and
mustaches stiff with agitation.

"Don't laugh, my friend!" cried D'Artagnan; "for heaven's sake, don't
laugh, for upon my soul, it's no laughing matter!"

And he pronounced these words with such a solemn air and with such a
real appearance of terror, that Athos eagerly seized his hand, crying,
"Are you wounded, my friend? How pale you are!"

"No, but I have just met with a terrible adventure! Are you alone,
Athos?"

"_Parbleu!_ whom do you expect to find with me at this hour?"

"Well, well!" and D'Artagnan rushed into Athos's chamber.

"Come, speak!" said the latter, closing the door and bolting it, that
they might not be disturbed. "Is the king dead? Have you killed the
cardinal? You are quite upset! Come, come, tell me; I am dying with
curiosity and uneasiness!"

"Athos," said D'Artagnan, getting rid of his female garments, and
appearing in his shirt, "prepare yourself to hear an incredible, an
unheard-of story."

"Well, but put on this dressing gown first," said the Musketeer to his
friend.

D'Artagnan donned the robe as quickly as he could, mistaking one sleeve
for the other, so greatly was he still agitated.

"Well?" said Athos.

"Well," replied D'Artagnan, bending his mouth to Athos's ear, and
lowering his voice, "Milady is marked with a _fleur-de-lis_ upon her
shoulder!"

"Ah!" cried the Musketeer, as if he had received a ball in his heart.

"Let us see," said D'Artagnan. "Are you _sure_ that the _other_ is
dead?"

"_The other?_" said Athos, in so stifled a voice that D'Artagnan
scarcely heard him.

"Yes, she of whom you told me one day at Amiens."

Athos uttered a groan, and let his head sink on his hands.

"This is a woman of twenty-six or twenty-eight years."

"Fair," said Athos, "is she not?"

"Very."

"Blue and clear eyes, of a strange brilliancy, with black eyelids and
eyebrows?"

"Yes."

"Tall, well-made? She has lost a tooth, next to the eyetooth on the
left?"

"Yes."

"The _fleur-de-lis_ is small, rosy in color, and looks as if efforts
had been made to efface it by the application of poultices?"

"Yes."

"But you say she is English?"

"She is called Milady, but she may be French. Lord de Winter is only
her brother-in-law."

"I will see her, D'Artagnan!"

"Beware, Athos, beware. You tried to kill her; she is a woman to return
you the like, and not to fail."

"She will not dare to say anything; that would be to denounce herself."

"She is capable of anything or everything. Did you ever see her
furious?"

"No," said Athos.

"A tigress, a panther! Ah, my dear Athos, I am greatly afraid I have
drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us!"

D'Artagnan then related all-the mad passion of Milady and her menaces
of death.

"You are right; and upon my soul, I would give my life for a hair,"
said Athos. "Fortunately, the day after tomorrow we leave Paris. We are
going according to all probability to La Rochelle, and once gone-"

"She will follow you to the end of the world, Athos, if she recognizes
you. Let her, then, exhaust her vengeance on me alone!"

"My dear friend, of what consequence is it if she kills me?" said
Athos. "Do you, perchance, think I set any great store by life?"

"There is something horribly mysterious under all this, Athos; this
woman is one of the cardinal's spies, I am sure of that."

"In that case, take care! If the cardinal does not hold you in high
admiration for the affair of London, he entertains a great hatred for
you; but as, considering everything, he cannot accuse you openly, and
as hatred must be satisfied, particularly when it's a cardinal's
hatred, take care of yourself. If you go out, do not go out alone; when
you eat, use every precaution. Mistrust everything, in short, even your
own shadow."

"Fortunately," said D'Artagnan, "all this will be only necessary till
after tomorrow evening, for when once with the army, we shall have, I
hope, only men to dread."

"In the meantime," said Athos, "I renounce my plan of seclusion, and
wherever you go, I will go with you. You must return to the Rue des
Fossoyeurs; I will accompany you."

"But however near it may be," replied D'Artagnan, "I cannot go thither
in this guise."

"That's true," said Athos, and he rang the bell.

Grimaud entered.

Athos made him a sign to go to D'Artagnan's residence, and bring back
some clothes. Grimaud replied by another sign that he understood
perfectly, and set off.

"All this will not advance your outfit," said Athos; "for if I am not
mistaken, you have left the best of your apparel with Milady, and she
will certainly not have the politeness to return it to you.
Fortunately, you have the sapphire."

"The jewel is yours, my dear Athos! Did you not tell me it was a family
jewel?"

"Yes, my grandfather gave two thousand crowns for it, as he once told
me. It formed part of the nuptial present he made his wife, and it is
magnificent. My mother gave it to me, and I, fool as I was, instead of
keeping the ring as a holy relic, gave it to this wretch."

"Then, my friend, take back this ring, to which I see you attach much
value."

"I take back the ring, after it has passed through the hands of that
infamous creature? Never; that ring is defiled, D'Artagnan."

"Sell it, then."

"Sell a jewel which came from my mother! I vow I should consider it a
profanation."

"Pledge it, then; you can borrow at least a thousand crowns on it. With
that sum you can extricate yourself from your present difficulties; and
when you are full of money again, you can redeem it, and take it back
cleansed from its ancient stains, as it will have passed through the
hands of usurers."

Athos smiled.

"You are a capital companion, D'Artagnan," said he; "your never-failing
cheerfulness raises poor souls in affliction. Well, let us pledge the
ring, but upon one condition."

"What?"

"That there shall be five hundred crowns for you, and five hundred
crowns for me."

"Don't dream it, Athos. I don't need the quarter of such a sum-I who am
still only in the Guards-and by selling my saddles, I shall procure it.
What do I want? A horse for Planchet, that's all. Besides, you forget
that I have a ring likewise."

"To which you attach more value, it seems, than I do to mine; at least,
I have thought so."

"Yes, for in any extreme circumstance it might not only extricate us
from some great embarrassment, but even a great danger. It is not only
a valuable diamond, but it is an enchanted talisman."

"I don't at all understand you, but I believe all you say to be true.
Let us return to my ring, or rather to yours. You shall take half the
sum that will be advanced upon it, or I will throw it into the Seine;
and I doubt, as was the case with Polycrates, whether any fish will be
sufficiently complaisant to bring it back to us."

"Well, I will take it, then," said D'Artagnan.

At this moment Grimaud returned, accompanied by Planchet; the latter,
anxious about his master and curious to know what had happened to him,
had taken advantage of the opportunity and brought the garments
himself.

D'Artagnan dressed himself, and Athos did the same. When the two were
ready to go out, the latter made Grimaud the sign of a man taking aim,
and the lackey immediately took down his musketoon, and prepared to
follow his master.

They arrived without accident at the Rue des Fossoyeurs. Bonacieux was
standing at the door, and looked at D'Artagnan hatefully.

"Make haste, dear lodger," said he; "there is a very pretty girl
waiting for you upstairs; and you know women don't like to be kept
waiting."

"That's Kitty!" said D'Artagnan to himself, and darted into the
passage.

Sure enough! Upon the landing leading to the chamber, and crouching
against the door, he found the poor girl, all in a tremble. As soon as
she perceived him, she cried, "You have promised your protection; you
have promised to save me from her anger. Remember, it is you who have
ruined me!"

"Yes, yes, to be sure, Kitty," said D'Artagnan; "be at ease, my girl.
But what happened after my departure?"

"How can I tell!" said Kitty. "The lackeys were brought by the cries
she made. She was mad with passion. There exist no imprecations she did
not pour out against you. Then I thought she would remember it was
through my chamber you had penetrated hers, and that then she would
suppose I was your accomplice; so I took what little money I had and
the best of my things, and I got away.

"Poor dear girl! But what can I do with you? I am going away the day
after tomorrow."

"Do what you please, Monsieur Chevalier. Help me out of Paris; help me
out of France!"

"I cannot take you, however, to the siege of La Rochelle," said
D'Artagnan.

"No; but you can place me in one of the provinces with some lady of
your acquaintance-in your own country, for instance."

"My dear little love! In my country the ladies do without chambermaids.
But stop! I can manage your business for you. Planchet, go and find
Aramis. Request him to come here directly. We have something very
important to say to him."

"I understand," said Athos; "but why not Porthos? I should have thought
that his duchess-"

"Oh, Porthos's duchess is dressed by her husband's clerks," said
D'Artagnan, laughing. "Besides, Kitty would not like to live in the Rue
aux Ours. Isn't it so, Kitty?"

"I do not care where I live," said Kitty, "provided I am well
concealed, and nobody knows where I am."

"Meanwhile, Kitty, when we are about to separate, and you are no longer
jealous of me-"

"Monsieur Chevalier, far off or near," said Kitty, "I shall always love
you."

"Where the devil will constancy niche itself next?" murmured Athos.

"And I, also," said D'Artagnan, "I also. I shall always love you; be
sure of that. But now answer me. I attach great importance to the
question I am about to put to you. Did you never hear talk of a young
woman who was carried off one night?"

"There, now! Oh, Monsieur Chevalier, do you love that woman still?"

"No, no; it is one of my friends who loves her-Monsieur Athos, this
gentleman here."

"I?" cried Athos, with an accent like that of a man who perceives he is
about to tread upon an adder.

"You, to be sure!" said D'Artagnan, pressing Athos's hand. "You know
the interest we both take in this poor little Madame Bonacieux.
Besides, Kitty will tell nothing; will you, Kitty? You understand, my
dear girl," continued D'Artagnan, "she is the wife of that frightful
baboon you saw at the door as you came in."

"Oh, my God! You remind me of my fright! If he should have known me
again!"

"How? know you again? Did you ever see that man before?"

"He came twice to Milady's."

"That's it. About what time?"

"Why, about fifteen or eighteen days ago."

"Exactly so."

"And yesterday evening he came again."

"Yesterday evening?"

"Yes, just before you came."

"My dear Athos, we are enveloped in a network of spies. And do you
believe he knew you again, Kitty?"

"I pulled down my hood as soon as I saw him, but perhaps it was too
late."

"Go down, Athos-he mistrusts you less than me-and see if he be still at
his door."

Athos went down and returned immediately.

"He has gone," said he, "and the house door is shut."

"He has gone to make his report, and to say that all the pigeons are at
this moment in the dovecot."

"Well, then, let us all fly," said Athos, "and leave nobody here but
Planchet to bring us news."

"A minute. Aramis, whom we have sent for!"

"That's true," said Athos; "we must wait for Aramis."

At that moment Aramis entered.

The matter was all explained to him, and the friends gave him to
understand that among all his high connections he must find a place for
Kitty.

Aramis reflected for a minute, and then said, coloring, "Will it be
really rendering you a service, D'Artagnan?"

"I shall be grateful to you all my life."

"Very well. Madame de Bois-Tracy asked me, for one of her friends who
resides in the provinces, I believe, for a trustworthy maid. If you
can, my dear D'Artagnan, answer for Mademoiselle-"

"Oh, monsieur, be assured that I shall be entirely devoted to the
person who will give me the means of quitting Paris."

"Then," said Aramis, "this falls out very well."

He placed himself at the table and wrote a little note which he sealed
with a ring, and gave the billet to Kitty.

"And now, my dear girl," said D'Artagnan, "you know that it is not good
for any of us to be here. Therefore let us separate. We shall meet
again in better days."

"And whenever we find each other, in whatever place it may be," said
Kitty, "you will find me loving you as I love you today."

"Dicers' oaths!" said Athos, while D'Artagnan went to conduct Kitty
downstairs.

An instant afterward the three young men separated, agreeing to meet
again at four o'clock with Athos, and leaving Planchet to guard the
house.

Aramis returned home, and Athos and D'Artagnan busied themselves about
pledging the sapphire.

As the Gascon had foreseen, they easily obtained three hundred pistoles
on the ring. Still further, the Jew told them that if they would sell
it to him, as it would make a magnificent pendant for earrings, he
would give five hundred pistoles for it.

Athos and D'Artagnan, with the activity of two soldiers and the
knowledge of two connoisseurs, hardly required three hours to purchase
the entire equipment of the Musketeer. Besides, Athos was very easy,
and a noble to his fingers' ends. When a thing suited him he paid the
price demanded, without thinking to ask for any abatement. D'Artagnan
would have remonstrated at this; but Athos put his hand upon his
shoulder, with a smile, and D'Artagnan understood that it was all very
well for such a little Gascon gentleman as himself to drive a bargain,
but not for a man who had the bearing of a prince. The Musketeer met
with a superb Andalusian horse, black as jet, nostrils of fire, legs
clean and elegant, rising six years. He examined him, and found him
sound and without blemish. They asked a thousand livres for him.

He might perhaps have been bought for less; but while D'Artagnan was
discussing the price with the dealer, Athos was counting out the money
on the table.

Grimaud had a stout, short Picard cob, which cost three hundred livres.

But when the saddle and arms for Grimaud were purchased, Athos had not
a sou left of his hundred and fifty pistoles. D'Artagnan offered his
friend a part of his share which he should return when convenient.

But Athos only replied to this proposal by shrugging his shoulders.

"How much did the Jew say he would give for the sapphire if he
purchased it?" said Athos.

"Five hundred pistoles."

"That is to say, two hundred more-a hundred pistoles for you and a
hundred pistoles for me. Well, now, that would be a real fortune to us,
my friend; let us go back to the Jew's again."

"What! will you-"

"This ring would certainly only recall very bitter remembrances; then
we shall never be masters of three hundred pistoles to redeem it, so
that we really should lose two hundred pistoles by the bargain. Go and
tell him the ring is his, D'Artagnan, and bring back the two hundred
pistoles with you."

"Reflect, Athos!"

"Ready money is needful for the present time, and we must learn how to
make sacrifices. Go, D'Artagnan, go; Grimaud will accompany you with
his musketoon."

A half hour afterward, D'Artagnan returned with the two thousand
livres, and without having met with any accident.

It was thus Athos found at home resources which he did not expect.




Chapter XXXIX.
A VISION


At four o'clock the four friends were all assembled with Athos. Their
anxiety about their outfits had all disappeared, and each countenance
only preserved the expression of its own secret disquiet-for behind all
present happiness is concealed a fear for the future.

Suddenly Planchet entered, bringing two letters for D'Artagnan.

The one was a little billet, genteelly folded, with a pretty seal in
green wax on which was impressed a dove bearing a green branch.

The other was a large square epistle, resplendent with the terrible
arms of his Eminence the cardinal duke.

At the sight of the little letter the heart of D'Artagnan bounded, for
he believed he recognized the handwriting, and although he had seen
that writing but once, the memory of it remained at the bottom of his
heart.

He therefore seized the little epistle, and opened it eagerly.

"Be," said the letter, "on Thursday next, at from six to seven o'clock
in the evening, on the road to Chaillot, and look carefully into the
carriages that pass; but if you have any consideration for your own
life or that of those who love you, do not speak a single word, do not
make a movement which may lead anyone to believe you have recognized
her who exposes herself to everything for the sake of seeing you but
for an instant."

No signature.

"That's a snare," said Athos; "don't go, D'Artagnan."

"And yet," replied D'Artagnan, "I think I recognize the writing."

"It may be counterfeit," said Athos. "Between six and seven o'clock the
road of Chaillot is quite deserted; you might as well go and ride in
the forest of Bondy."

"But suppose we all go," said D'Artagnan; "what the devil! They won't
devour us all four, four lackeys, horses, arms, and all!"

"And besides, it will be a chance for displaying our new equipments,"
said Porthos.

"But if it is a woman who writes," said Aramis, "and that woman desires
not to be seen, remember, you compromise her, D'Artagnan; which is not
the part of a gentleman."

"We will remain in the background," said Porthos, "and he will advance
alone."

"Yes; but a pistol shot is easily fired from a carriage which goes at a
gallop."

"Bah!" said D'Artagnan, "they will miss me; if they fire we will ride
after the carriage, and exterminate those who may be in it. They must
be enemies."

"He is right," said Porthos; "battle. Besides, we must try our own
arms."

"Bah, let us enjoy that pleasure," said Aramis, with his mild and
careless manner.

"As you please," said Athos.

"Gentlemen," said D'Artagnan, "it is half past four, and we have
scarcely time to be on the road of Chaillot by six."

"Besides, if we go out too late, nobody will see us," said Porthos,
"and that will be a pity. Let us get ready, gentlemen."

"But this second letter," said Athos, "you forget that; it appears to
me, however, that the seal denotes that it deserves to be opened. For
my part, I declare, D'Artagnan, I think it of much more consequence
than the little piece of waste paper you have so cunningly slipped into
your bosom."

D'Artagnan blushed.

"Well," said he, "let us see, gentlemen, what are his Eminence's
commands," and D'Artagnan unsealed the letter and read,

"M. d'Artagnan, of the king's Guards, company Dessessart, is expected
at the Palais-Cardinal this evening, at eight o'clock.


"LA HOUDINIERE, _Captain of the Guards_"


"The devil!" said Athos; "here's a rendezvous much more serious than
the other."

"I will go to the second after attending the first," said D'Artagnan.
"One is for seven o'clock, and the other for eight; there will be time
for both."

"Hum! I would not go at all," said Aramis. "A gallant knight cannot
decline a rendezvous with a lady; but a prudent gentleman may excuse
himself from not waiting on his Eminence, particularly when he has
reason to believe he is not invited to make his compliments."

"I am of Aramis's opinion," said Porthos.

"Gentlemen," replied D'Artagnan, "I have already received by Monsieur
de Cavois a similar invitation from his Eminence. I neglected it, and
on the morrow a serious misfortune happened to me-Constance
disappeared. Whatever may ensue, I will go."

"If you are determined," said Athos, "do so."

"But the Bastille?" said Aramis.

"Bah! you will get me out if they put me there," said D'Artagnan.

"To be sure we will," replied Aramis and Porthos, with admirable
promptness and decision, as if that were the simplest thing in the
world, "to be sure we will get you out; but meantime, as we are to set
off the day after tomorrow, you would do much better not to risk this
Bastille."

"Let us do better than that," said Athos; "do not let us leave him
during the whole evening. Let each of us wait at a gate of the palace
with three Musketeers behind him; if we see a close carriage, at all
suspicious in appearance, come out, let us fall upon it. It is a long
time since we have had a skirmish with the Guards of Monsieur the
Cardinal; Monsieur de Treville must think us dead."

"To a certainty, Athos," said Aramis, "you were meant to be a general
of the army! What do you think of the plan, gentlemen?"

"Admirable!" replied the young men in chorus.

"Well," said Porthos, "I will run to the hotel, and engage our comrades
to hold themselves in readiness by eight o'clock; the rendezvous, the
Place du Palais-Cardinal. Meantime, you see that the lackeys saddle the
horses."

"I have no horse," said D'Artagnan; "but that is of no consequence, I
can take one of Monsieur de Treville's."

"That is not worth while," said Aramis, "you can have one of mine."

"One of yours! how many have you, then?" asked D'Artagnan.

"Three," replied Aramis, smiling.

"_Certes_," cried Athos, "you are the best-mounted poet of France or
Navarre."

"Well, my dear Aramis, you don't want three horses? I cannot comprehend
what induced you to buy three!"

"Therefore I only purchased two," said Aramis.

"The third, then, fell from the clouds, I suppose?"

"No, the third was brought to me this very morning by a groom out of
livery, who would not tell me in whose service he was, and who said he
had received orders from his master."

"Or his mistress," interrupted D'Artagnan.

"That makes no difference," said Aramis, coloring; "and who affirmed,
as I said, that he had received orders from his master or mistress to
place the horse in my stable, without informing me whence it came."

"It is only to poets that such things happen," said Athos, gravely.

"Well, in that case, we can manage famously," said D'Artagnan; "which
of the two horses will you ride-that which you bought or the one that
was given to you?"

"That which was given to me, assuredly. You cannot for a moment
imagine, D'Artagnan, that I would commit such an offense toward-"

"The unknown giver," interrupted D'Artagnan.

"Or the mysterious benefactress," said Athos.

"The one you bought will then become useless to you?"

"Nearly so."

"And you selected it yourself?"

"With the greatest care. The safety of the horseman, you know, depends
almost always upon the goodness of his horse."

"Well, transfer it to me at the price it cost you?"

"I was going to make you the offer, my dear D'Artagnan, giving you all
the time necessary for repaying me such a trifle."

"How much did it cost you?"

"Eight hundred livres."

"Here are forty double pistoles, my dear friend," said D'Artagnan,
taking the sum from his pocket; "I know that is the coin in which you
were paid for your poems."

"You are rich, then?" said Aramis.

"Rich? Richest, my dear fellow!"

And D'Artagnan chinked the remainder of his pistoles in his pocket.

"Send your saddle, then, to the hotel of the Musketeers, and your horse
can be brought back with ours."

"Very well; but it is already five o'clock, so make haste."

A quarter of an hour afterward Porthos appeared at the end of the Rue
Ferou on a very handsome _genet_. Mousqueton followed him upon an
Auvergne horse, small but very handsome. Porthos was resplendent with
joy and pride.

At the same time, Aramis made his appearance at the other end of the
street upon a superb English charger. Bazin followed him upon a roan,
holding by the halter a vigorous Mecklenburg horse; this was
D'Artagnan's mount.

The two Musketeers met at the gate. Athos and D'Artagnan watched their
approach from the window.

"The devil!" cried Aramis, "you have a magnificent horse there,
Porthos."

"Yes," replied Porthos, "it is the one that ought to have been sent to
me at first. A bad joke of the husband's substituted the other; but the
husband has been punished since, and I have obtained full
satisfaction."

Planchet and Grimaud appeared in their turn, leading their masters'
steeds. D'Artagnan and Athos put themselves into saddle with their
companions, and all four set forward; Athos upon a horse he owed to a
woman, Aramis on a horse he owed to his mistress, Porthos on a horse he
owed to his procurator's wife, and D'Artagnan on a horse he owed to his
good fortune-the best mistress possible.

The lackeys followed.

As Porthos had foreseen, the cavalcade produced a good effect; and if
Mme. Coquenard had met Porthos and seen what a superb appearance he
made upon his handsome Spanish _genet_, she would not have regretted
the bleeding she had inflicted upon the strongbox of her husband.

Near the Louvre the four friends met with M. de Treville, who was
returning from St. Germain; he stopped them to offer his compliments
upon their appointments, which in an instant drew round them a hundred
gapers.

D'Artagnan profited by the circumstance to speak to M. de Treville of
the letter with the great red seal and the cardinal's arms. It is well
understood that he did not breathe a word about the other.

M. de Treville approved of the resolution he had adopted, and assured
him that if on the morrow he did not appear, he himself would undertake
to find him, let him be where he might.

At this moment the clock of La Samaritaine struck six; the four friends
pleaded an engagement, and took leave of M. de Treville.

A short gallop brought them to the road of Chaillot; the day began to
decline, carriages were passing and repassing. D'Artagnan, keeping at
some distance from his friends, darted a scrutinizing glance into every
carriage that appeared, but saw no face with which he was acquainted.

At length, after waiting a quarter of an hour and just as twilight was
beginning to thicken, a carriage appeared, coming at a quick pace on
the road of Sevres. A presentiment instantly told D'Artagnan that this
carriage contained the person who had appointed the rendezvous; the
young man was himself astonished to find his heart beat so violently.
Almost instantly a female head was put out at the window, with two
fingers placed upon her mouth, either to enjoin silence or to send him
a kiss. D'Artagnan uttered a slight cry of joy; this woman, or rather
this apparition-for the carriage passed with the rapidity of a
vision-was Mme. Bonacieux.

By an involuntary movement and in spite of the injunction given,
D'Artagnan put his horse into a gallop, and in a few strides overtook
the carriage; but the window was hermetically closed, the vision had
disappeared.

D'Artagnan then remembered the injunction: "If you value your own life
or that of those who love you, remain motionless, and as if you had
seen nothing."

He stopped, therefore, trembling not for himself but for the poor woman
who had evidently exposed herself to great danger by appointing this
rendezvous.

The carriage pursued its way, still going at a great pace, till it
dashed into Paris, and disappeared.

D'Artagnan remained fixed to the spot, astounded and not knowing what
to think. If it was Mme. Bonacieux and if she was returning to Paris,
why this fugitive rendezvous, why this simple exchange of a glance, why
this lost kiss? If, on the other side, it was not she-which was still
quite possible-for the little light that remained rendered a mistake
easy-might it not be the commencement of some plot against him through
the allurement of this woman, for whom his love was known?

His three companions joined him. All had plainly seen a woman's head
appear at the window, but none of them, except Athos, knew Mme.
Bonacieux. The opinion of Athos was that it was indeed she; but less
preoccupied by that pretty face than D'Artagnan, he had fancied he saw
a second head, a man's head, inside the carriage.

"If that be the case," said D'Artagnan, "they are doubtless
transporting her from one prison to another. But what can they intend
to do with the poor creature, and how shall I ever meet her again?"

"Friend," said Athos, gravely, "remember that it is the dead alone with
whom we are not likely to meet again on this earth. You know something
of that, as well as I do, I think. Now, if your mistress is not dead,
if it is she we have just seen, you will meet with her again some day
or other. And perhaps, my God!" added he, with that misanthropic tone
which was peculiar to him, "perhaps sooner than you wish."

Half past seven had sounded. The carriage had been twenty minutes
behind the time appointed. D'Artagnan's friends reminded him that he
had a visit to pay, but at the same time bade him observe that there
was yet time to retract.

But D'Artagnan was at the same time impetuous and curious. He had made
up his mind that he would go to the Palais-Cardinal, and that he would
learn what his Eminence had to say to him. Nothing could turn him from
his purpose.

They reached the Rue St. Honore, and in the Place du Palais-Cardinal
they found the twelve invited Musketeers, walking about in expectation
of their comrades. There only they explained to them the matter in
hand.

D'Artagnan was well known among the honorable corps of the king's
Musketeers, in which it was known he would one day take his place; he
was considered beforehand as a comrade. It resulted from these
antecedents that everyone entered heartily into the purpose for which
they met; besides, it would not be unlikely that they would have an
opportunity of playing either the cardinal or his people an ill turn,
and for such expeditions these worthy gentlemen were always ready.

Athos divided them into three groups, assumed the command of one, gave
the second to Aramis, and the third to Porthos; and then each group
went and took their watch near an entrance.

D'Artagnan, on his part, entered boldly at the principal gate.

Although he felt himself ably supported, the young man was not without
a little uneasiness as he ascended the great staircase, step by step.
His conduct toward Milady bore a strong resemblance to treachery, and
he was very suspicious of the political relations which existed between
that woman and the cardinal. Still further, De Wardes, whom he had
treated so ill, was one of the tools of his Eminence; and D'Artagnan
knew that while his Eminence was terrible to his enemies, he was
strongly attached to his friends.

"If De Wardes has related all our affair to the cardinal, which is not
to be doubted, and if he has recognized me, as is probable, I may
consider myself almost as a condemned man," said D'Artagnan, shaking
his head. "But why has he waited till now? That's all plain enough.
Milady has laid her complaints against me with that hypocritical grief
which renders her so interesting, and this last offense has made the
cup overflow."

"Fortunately," added he, "my good friends are down yonder, and they
will not allow me to be carried away without a struggle. Nevertheless,
Monsieur de Treville's company of Musketeers alone cannot maintain a
war against the cardinal, who disposes of the forces of all France, and
before whom the queen is without power and the king without will.
D'Artagnan, my friend, you are brave, you are prudent, you have
excellent qualities; but the women will ruin you!"

He came to this melancholy conclusion as he entered the antechamber. He
placed his letter in the hands of the usher on duty, who led him into
the waiting room and passed on into the interior of the palace.

In this waiting room were five or six of the cardinal's Guards, who
recognized D'Artagnan, and knowing that it was he who had wounded
Jussac, they looked upon him with a smile of singular meaning.

This smile appeared to D'Artagnan to be of bad augury. Only, as our
Gascon was not easily intimidated-or rather, thanks to a great pride
natural to the men of his country, he did not allow one easily to see
what was passing in his mind when that which was passing at all
resembled fear-he placed himself haughtily in front of Messieurs the
Guards, and waited with his hand on his hip, in an attitude by no means
deficient in majesty.

The usher returned and made a sign to D'Artagnan to follow him. It
appeared to the young man that the Guards, on seeing him depart,
chuckled among themselves.

He traversed a corridor, crossed a grand saloon, entered a library, and
found himself in the presence of a man seated at a desk and writing.

The usher introduced him, and retired without speaking a word.
D'Artagnan remained standing and examined this man.

D'Artagnan at first believed that he had to do with some judge
examining his papers; but he perceived that the man at the desk wrote,
or rather corrected, lines of unequal length, scanning the words on his
fingers. He saw then that he was with a poet. At the end of an instant
the poet closed his manuscript, upon the cover of which was written
"Mirame, a Tragedy in Five Acts," and raised his head.

D'Artagnan recognized the cardinal.




Chapter XL.
A TERRIBLE VISION


The cardinal leaned his elbow on his manuscript, his cheek upon his
hand, and looked intently at the young man for a moment. No one had a
more searching eye than the Cardinal de Richelieu, and D'Artagnan felt
this glance run through his veins like a fever.

He however kept a good countenance, holding his hat in his hand and
awaiting the good pleasure of his Eminence, without too much assurance,
but also without too much humility.

"Monsieur," said the cardinal, "are you a D'Artagnan from Bearn?"

"Yes, monseigneur," replied the young man.

"There are several branches of the D'Artagnans at Tarbes and in its
environs," said the cardinal; "to which do you belong?"

"I am the son of him who served in the Religious Wars under the great
King Henry, the father of his gracious Majesty."

"That is well. It is you who set out seven or eight months ago from
your country to seek your fortune in the capital?"

"Yes, monseigneur."

"You came through Meung, where something befell you. I don't very well
know what, but still something."

"Monseigneur," said D'Artagnan, "this was what happened to me-"

"Never mind, never mind!" resumed the cardinal, with a smile which
indicated that he knew the story as well as he who wished to relate it.
"You were recommended to Monsieur de Treville, were you not?"

"Yes, monseigneur; but in that unfortunate affair at Meung-"

"The letter was lost," replied his Eminence; "yes, I know that. But
Monsieur de Treville is a skilled physiognomist, who knows men at first
sight; and he placed you in the company of his brother-in-law, Monsieur
Dessessart, leaving you to hope that one day or other you should enter
the Musketeers."

"Monseigneur is correctly informed," said D'Artagnan.

"Since that time many things have happened to you. You were walking one
day behind the Chartreux, when it would have been better if you had
been elsewhere. Then you took with your friends a journey to the waters
of Forges; they stopped on the road, but you continued yours. That is
all very simple: you had business in England."

"Monseigneur," said D'Artagnan, quite confused, "I went-"

"Hunting at Windsor, or elsewhere-that concerns nobody. I know, because
it is my office to know everything. On your return you were received by
an august personage, and I perceive with pleasure that you preserve the
souvenir she gave you."

D'Artagnan placed his hand upon the queen's diamond, which he wore, and
quickly turned the stone inward; but it was too late.

"The day after that, you received a visit from Cavois," resumed the
cardinal. "He went to desire you to come to the palace. You have not
returned that visit, and you were wrong."

"Monseigneur, I feared I had incurred disgrace with your Eminence."

"How could that be, monsieur? Could you incur my displeasure by having
followed the orders of your superiors with more intelligence and
courage than another would have done? It is the people who do not obey
that I punish, and not those who, like you, obey-but too well. As a
proof, remember the date of the day on which I had you bidden to come
to me, and seek in your memory for what happened to you that very
night."

That was the very evening when the abduction of Mme. Bonacieux took
place. D'Artagnan trembled; and he likewise recollected that during the
past half hour the poor woman had passed close to him, without doubt
carried away by the same power that had caused her disappearance.

"In short," continued the cardinal, "as I have heard nothing of you for
some time past, I wished to know what you were doing. Besides, you owe
me some thanks. You must yourself have remarked how much you have been
considered in all the circumstances."

D'Artagnan bowed with respect.

"That," continued the cardinal, "arose not only from a feeling of
natural equity, but likewise from a plan I have marked out with respect
to you."

D'Artagnan became more and more astonished.

"I wished to explain this plan to you on the day you received my first
invitation; but you did not come. Fortunately, nothing is lost by this
delay, and you are now about to hear it. Sit down there, before me,
D'Artagnan; you are gentleman enough not to listen standing." And the
cardinal pointed with his finger to a chair for the young man, who was
so astonished at what was passing that he awaited a second sign from
his interlocutor before he obeyed.

"You are brave, Monsieur d'Artagnan," continued his Eminence; "you are
prudent, which is still better. I like men of head and heart. Don't be
afraid," said he, smiling. "By men of heart I mean men of courage. But
young as you are, and scarcely entering into the world, you have
powerful enemies; if you do not take great heed, they will destroy
you."

"Alas, monseigneur!" replied the young man, "very easily, no doubt, for
they are strong and well supported, while I am alone."

"Yes, that's true; but alone as you are, you have done much already,
and will do still more, I don't doubt. Yet you have need, I believe, to
be guided in the adventurous career you have undertaken; for, if I
mistake not, you came to Paris with the ambitious idea of making your
fortune."

"I am at the age of extravagant hopes, monseigneur," said D'Artagnan.

"There are no extravagant hopes but for fools, monsieur, and you are a
man of understanding. Now, what would you say to an ensign's commission
in my Guards, and a company after the campaign?"

"Ah, monseigneur."

"You accept it, do you not?"

"Monseigneur," replied D'Artagnan, with an embarrassed air.

"How? You refuse?" cried the cardinal, with astonishment.

"I am in his Majesty's Guards, monseigneur, and I have no reason to be
dissatisfied."

"But it appears to me that my Guards-mine-are also his Majesty's
Guards; and whoever serves in a French corps serves the king."

"Monseigneur, your Eminence has ill understood my words."

"You want a pretext, do you not? I comprehend. Well, you have this
excuse: advancement, the opening campaign, the opportunity which I
offer you-so much for the world. As regards yourself, the need of
protection; for it is fit you should know, Monsieur d'Artagnan, that I
have received heavy and serious complaints against you. You do not
consecrate your days and nights wholly to the king's service."

D'Artagnan colored.

"In fact," said the cardinal, placing his hand upon a bundle of papers,
"I have here a whole pile which concerns you. I know you to be a man of
resolution; and your services, well directed, instead of leading you to
ill, might be very advantageous to you. Come; reflect, and decide."

"Your goodness confounds me, monseigneur," replied D'Artagnan, "and I
am conscious of a greatness of soul in your Eminence that makes me mean
as an earthworm; but since Monseigneur permits me to speak freely-"

D'Artagnan paused.

"Yes; speak."

"Then, I will presume to say that all my friends are in the king's
Musketeers and Guards, and that by an inconceivable fatality my enemies
are in the service of your Eminence; I should, therefore, be ill
received here and ill regarded there if I accepted what Monseigneur
offers me."

"Do you happen to entertain the haughty idea that I have not yet made
you an offer equal to your value?" asked the cardinal, with a smile of
disdain.

"Monseigneur, your Eminence is a hundred times too kind to me; and on
the contrary, I think I have not proved myself worthy of your goodness.
The siege of La Rochelle is about to be resumed, monseigneur. I shall
serve under the eye of your Eminence, and if I have the good fortune to
conduct myself at the siege in such a manner as merits your attention,
then I shall at least leave behind me some brilliant action to justify
the protection with which you honor me. Everything is best in its time,
monseigneur. Hereafter, perhaps, I shall have the right of _giving_
myself; at present I shall appear to sell myself."

"That is to say, you refuse to serve me, monsieur," said the cardinal,
with a tone of vexation, through which, however, might be seen a sort
of esteem; "remain free, then, and guard your hatreds and your
sympathies."

"Monseigneur-"

"Well, well," said the cardinal, "I don't wish you any ill; but you
must be aware that it is quite trouble enough to defend and recompense
our friends. We owe nothing to our enemies; and let me give you a piece
of advice; take care of yourself, Monsieur d'Artagnan, for from the
moment I withdraw my hand from behind you, I would not give an _obolus_
for your life."

"I will try to do so, monseigneur," replied the Gascon, with a noble
confidence.

"Remember at a later period and at a certain moment, if any mischance
should happen to you," said Richelieu, significantly, "that it was I
who came to seek you, and that I did all in my power to prevent this
misfortune befalling you."

"I shall entertain, whatever may happen," said D'Artagnan, placing his
hand upon his breast and bowing, "an eternal gratitude toward your
Eminence for that which you now do for me."

"Well, let it be, then, as you have said, Monsieur d'Artagnan; we shall
see each other again after the campaign. I will have my eye upon you,
for I shall be there," replied the cardinal, pointing with his finger
to a magnificent suit of armor he was to wear, "and on our return,
well-we will settle our account!"

"Ah, monseigneur," cried D'Artagnan, "spare me the weight of your
displeasure. Remain neutral monseigneur, if you find that I act as
becomes a gallant man."

"Young man," said Richelieu, "if I shall be able to say to you at
another time what I have said to you today, I promise you to do so."

This last expression of Richelieu's conveyed a terrible doubt; it
alarmed D'Artagnan more than a menace would have done, for it was a
warning. The cardinal, then, was seeking to preserve him from some
misfortune which threatened him. He opened his mouth to reply, but with
a haughty gesture the cardinal dismissed him.

D'Artagnan went out, but at the door his heart almost failed him, and
he felt inclined to return. Then the noble and severe countenance of
Athos crossed his mind; if he made the compact with the cardinal which
he required, Athos would no more give him his hand-Athos would renounce
him.

It was this fear that restrained him, so powerful is the influence of a
truly great character on all that surrounds it.

D'Artagnan descended by the staircase at which he had entered, and
found Athos and the four Musketeers waiting his appearance, and
beginning to grow uneasy. With a word, D'Artagnan reassured them; and
Planchet ran to inform the other sentinels that it was useless to keep
guard longer, as his master had come out safe from the Palais-Cardinal.

Returned home with Athos, Aramis and Porthos inquired eagerly the cause
of the strange interview; but D'Artagnan confined himself to telling
them that M. de Richelieu had sent for him to propose to him to enter
into his guards with the rank of ensign, and that he had refused.

"And you were right," cried Aramis and Porthos, with one voice.

Athos fell into a profound reverie and answered nothing. But when they
were alone he said, "You have done that which you ought to have done,
D'Artagnan; but perhaps you have been wrong."

D'Artagnan sighed deeply, for this voice responded to a secret voice of
his soul, which told him that great misfortunes awaited him.

The whole of the next day was spent in preparations for departure.
D'Artagnan went to take leave of M. de Treville. At that time it was
believed that the separation of the Musketeers and the Guards would be
but momentary, the king holding his Parliament that very day and
proposing to set out the day after. M. de Treville contented himself
with asking D'Artagnan if he could do anything for him, but D'Artagnan
answered that he was supplied with all he wanted.

That night brought together all those comrades of the Guards of M.
Dessessart and the company of Musketeers of M. de Treville who had been
accustomed to associate together. They were parting to meet again when
it pleased God, and if it pleased God. That night, then, was somewhat
riotous, as may be imagined. In such cases extreme preoccupation is
only to be combated by extreme carelessness.

At the first sound of the morning trumpet the friends separated; the
Musketeers hastening to the hotel of M. de Treville, the Guards to that
of M. Dessessart. Each of the captains then led his company to the
Louvre, where the king held his review.

The king was dull and appeared ill, which detracted a little from his
usual lofty bearing. In fact, the evening before, a fever had seized
him in the midst of the Parliament, while he was holding his Bed of
Justice. He had, not the less, decided upon setting out that same
evening; and in spite of the remonstrances that had been offered to
him, he persisted in having the review, hoping by setting it at
defiance to conquer the disease which began to lay hold upon him.

The review over, the Guards set forward alone on their march, the
Musketeers waiting for the king, which allowed Porthos time to go and
take a turn in his superb equipment in the Rue aux Ours.

The procurator's wife saw him pass in his new uniform and on his fine
horse. She loved Porthos too dearly to allow him to part thus; she made
him a sign to dismount and come to her. Porthos was magnificent; his
spurs jingled, his cuirass glittered, his sword knocked proudly against
his ample limbs. This time the clerks evinced no inclination to laugh,
such a real ear clipper did Porthos appear.

The Musketeer was introduced to M. Coquenard, whose little gray eyes
sparkled with anger at seeing his cousin all blazing new. Nevertheless,
one thing afforded him inward consolation; it was expected by everybody
that the campaign would be a severe one. He whispered a hope to himself
that this beloved relative might be killed in the field.

Porthos paid his compliments to M. Coquenard and bade him farewell. M.
Coquenard wished him all sorts of prosperities. As to Mme. Coquenard,
she could not restrain her tears; but no evil impressions were taken
from her grief as she was known to be very much attached to her
relatives, about whom she was constantly having serious disputes with
her husband.

But the real adieux were made in Mme. Coquenard's chamber; they were
heartrending.

As long as the procurator's wife could follow him with her eyes, she
waved her handkerchief to him, leaning so far out of the window as to
lead people to believe she wished to precipitate herself. Porthos
received all these attentions like a man accustomed to such
demonstrations, only on turning the corner of the street he lifted his
hat gracefully, and waved it to her as a sign of adieu.

On his part Aramis wrote a long letter. To whom? Nobody knew. Kitty,
who was to set out that evening for Tours, was waiting in the next
chamber.

Athos sipped the last bottle of his Spanish wine.

In the meantime D'Artagnan was defiling with his company. Arriving at
the Faubourg St. Antoine, he turned round to look gaily at the
Bastille; but as it was the Bastille alone he looked at, he did not
observe Milady, who, mounted upon a light chestnut horse, designated
him with her finger to two ill-looking men who came close up to the
ranks to take notice of him. To a look of interrogation which they
made, Milady replied by a sign that it was he. Then, certain that there
could be no mistake in the execution of her orders, she started her
horse and disappeared.

The two men followed the company, and on leaving the Faubourg St.
Antoine, mounted two horses properly equipped, which a servant without
livery had waiting for them.
