XI

THE ADVENTURES OF SIR BEAUMAINS OR SIR GARETH


Again King Arthur held the Feast of Pentecost, with all the Table Round,
and after his custom sat in the banquet hall, before beginning meat,
waiting for some adventure. Then came there to the king a squire and
said, "Lord, now may ye go to meat, for here a damsel cometh with some
strange adventure." So the king was glad, and sat down to meat.

Anon the damsel came in and saluted him, praying him for succor. "What
wilt thou?" said the king. "Lord," answered she, "my mistress is a lady
of great renown, but is at this time besieged by a tyrant, who will not
suffer her to go out of her castle; and because here in thy court the
knights are called the noblest in the world, I come to pray thee for thy
succor." "Where dwelleth your lady?" answered the king. "What is her
name, and who is he that hath besieged her?" "For her name," replied the
damsel, "as yet I may not tell it; but she is a lady of worship and
great lands. The tyrant that besiegeth her and wasteth her lands is
called the Red Knight of the Redlands." "I know him not," said Arthur.
"But I know him, lord," said Sir Gawain, "and he is one of the most
perilous knights in all the world. Men say he hath the strength of
seven; and from him I myself once hardly escaped with life." "Fair
damsel," said the king, "there be here many knights that would gladly do
their uttermost to rescue your lady, but unless ye tell me her name, and
where she dwelleth, none of my knights shall go with you by my leave."

Now, there was a stripling at the court called Beaumains, who served in
the king's kitchen, a fair youth and of great stature. Twelve months
before this time he had come to the king as he sat at meat, at
Whitsuntide, and prayed three gifts of him. And being asked what gifts,
he answered, "As for the first gift I will ask it now, but the other two
gifts I will ask on this day twelve months, wheresoever ye hold your
high feast." Then said King Arthur, "What is thy first request?" "This,
lord," said he, "that thou wilt give me meat and drink enough for twelve
months from this time, and then will I ask my other two gifts." And the
king seeing that he was a goodly youth, and deeming that he was come of
honorable blood, had granted his desire, and given him into the charge
of Sir Key, the steward. But Sir Key scorned and mocked the youth,
calling Beaumains, because his hands were large and fair, and putting
him into the kitchen, where he had served for twelve months as a
scullion, and, in spite of all his churlish treatment, had faithfully
obeyed Sir Key. But Sir Lancelot and Sir Gawain were angered when they
saw Sir Key so churlish to a youth that had so worshipful a bearing,
and ofttimes had they given him gold and clothing.

And now at this time came young Beaumains to the king, while the damsel
was there, and said, "Lord, now I thank thee well and heartily that I
have been twelve months kept in thy kitchen, and have had full
sustenance. Now will I ask my two remaining gifts." "Ask," said King
Arthur, "on my good faith." "These, lord," said he, "shall be my two
gifts--the one, that thou wilt grant me this adventure of the damsel,
for to me of right it belongeth; and the other, that thou wilt bid Sir
Lancelot make me a knight, for of him only will I have that honor; and I
pray that he may ride after me and make me a knight when I require him."
"Be it as thou wilt," replied the king. But thereupon the damsel was
full wroth, and said, "Shall I have a kitchen page for this adventure?"
and so she took horse and departed.

Then came one to Beaumains, and told him that a dwarf with a horse and
armor were waiting for him. And all men marveled whence these things
came. But when he was on horseback and armed, scarce any one at the
court was a goodlier man than he. And coming into the hall, he took his
leave of the king and Sir Gawain, and prayed Sir Lancelot to follow him.
So he rode after the damsel, and many of the court went out to see him,
so richly arrayed and horsed; yet he had neither shield nor spear. Then
Sir Key cried, "I also will ride after the kitchen boy, and see whether
he will obey me now." And taking his horse, he rode after him, and
said, "Know ye not me, Beaumains?" "Yea," said he, "I know thee for an
ungentle knight, therefore beware of me." Then Sir Key put his spear in
rest and ran at him, but Beaumains rushed upon him with his sword in his
hand, and therewith, putting aside the spear, struck Sir Key so sorely
in the side, that he fell down, as if dead. Then he alighted, and took
his shield and spear, and bade his dwarf ride upon Sir Key's horse.

By this time, Sir Lancelot had come up, and Beaumains offering to tilt
with him, they both made ready. And their horses came together so
fiercely that both fell to the earth, full sorely bruised. Then they
arose, and Beaumains, putting up his shield before him, offered to fight
Sir Lancelot, on foot. So they rushed upon each other, striking, and
thrusting, and parrying, for the space of an hour. And Lancelot marveled
at the strength of Beaumains, for he fought more like a giant than a
man, and his fighting was passing fierce and terrible. So, at the last,
he said, "Fight not so sorely, Beaumains; our quarrel is not such that
we may not now cease." "True," answered Beaumains; "yet it doth me good
to feel thy might, though I have not yet proved my uttermost." "By my
faith," said Lancelot, "I had as much as I could do to save myself from
you unshamed, therefore be in no doubt of any earthly knight." "May I,
then, stand as a proved knight?" said Beaumains. "For that will I be thy
warrant," answered Lancelot. "Then, I pray thee," said he, "give me the
order of knighthood." "First, then, must thou tell me of thy name and
kindred," said Sir Lancelot. "If thou wilt tell them to no other, I will
tell thee," answered he. "My name is Gareth of Orkney, and I am own
brother to Sir Gawain." "Ah!" said Sir Lancelot, "at that am I full
glad; for, truly, I deemed thee to be of gentle blood." So then he
knighted Beaumains, and, after that, they parted company, and Sir
Lancelot, returning to the court, took up Sir Key on his shield. And
hardly did Sir Key escape with his life, from the wound Beaumains had
given him; but all men blamed him for his ungentle treatment of so brave
a knight.

Then Sir Beaumains rode forward, and soon overtook the damsel; but she
said to him, in scorn, "Return again, base kitchen page! What art thou,
but a washer-up of dishes!" "Damsel," said he, "say to me what thou
wilt, I will not leave thee; for I have undertaken to King Arthur to
relieve thy adventure, and I will finish it to the end, or die." "Thou
finish my adventure!" said she--"anon, thou shalt meet one, whose face
thou wilt not even dare to look at." "I shall attempt it," answered he.
So, as they rode thus, into a wood, there met them a man, fleeing, as
for his life. "Whither fleest thou?" said Sir Beaumains. "O lord!" he
answered, "help me; for, in a valley hard by, there are six thieves, who
have taken my lord, and bound him, and I fear will slay him." "Bring me
thither," said Sir Beaumains. So they rode to the place, and Sir
Beaumains rushed after the thieves, and smote one, at the first stroke,
so that he died; and then, with two other blows, slew a second and
third. Then fled the other three, and Sir Beaumains rode after them, and
overtook and slew them all. Then he returned and unbound the knight. And
the knight thanked him, and prayed him to ride to his castle, where he
would reward him. "Sir," answered Sir Beaumains, "I will have no reward
of thee, for but this day was I made knight by the most noble Sir
Lancelot; and besides, I must go with this damsel." Then the knight
begged the damsel to rest that night at his castle. So they all rode
thither, and ever the damsel scoffed at Sir Beaumains as a kitchen boy,
and laughed at him before the knight their host, so that he set his meat
before him at a lower table, as though he were not of their company.

And on the morrow, the damsel and Sir Beaumains took their leave of the
knight, and thanking him departed. Then they rode on their way till they
came to a great forest, through which flowed a river, and there was but
one passage over it, whereat stood two knights armed to hinder the way.
"Wilt thou match those two knights," said the damsel to Sir Beaumains,
"or return again?" "I would not return," said he, "though they were
six." Therewith he galloped into the water, and swam his horse into the
middle of the stream. And there, in the river, one of the knights met
him, and they brake their spears together, and then drew their swords,
and smote fiercely at each other. And at the last, Sir Beaumains struck
the other mightily upon the helm, so that he fell down stunned into the
water, and was drowned. Then Sir Beaumains spurred his horse on to the
land, where instantly the other knight fell on him. And they also brake
their spears upon each other, and then drew their swords, and fought
savagely and long together.
