Chapter XIV.
THE MAN OF MEUNG


The crowd was caused, not by the expectation of a man to be hanged, but
by the contemplation of a man who was hanged.

The carriage, which had been stopped for a minute, resumed its way,
passed through the crowd, threaded the Rue St. Honore, turned into the
Rue des Bons Enfants, and stopped before a low door.

The door opened; two guards received Bonacieux in their arms from the
officer who supported him. They carried him through an alley, up a
flight of stairs, and deposited him in an antechamber.

All these movements had been effected mechanically, as far as he was
concerned. He had walked as one walks in a dream; he had a glimpse of
objects as through a fog. His ears had perceived sounds without
comprehending them; he might have been executed at that moment without
his making a single gesture in his own defense or uttering a cry to
implore mercy.

He remained on the bench, with his back leaning against the wall and
his hands hanging down, exactly on the spot where the guards placed
him.

On looking around him, however, as he could perceive no threatening
object, as nothing indicated that he ran any real danger, as the bench
was comfortably covered with a well-stuffed cushion, as the wall was
ornamented with a beautiful Cordova leather, and as large red damask
curtains, fastened back by gold clasps, floated before the window, he
perceived by degrees that his fear was exaggerated, and he began to
turn his head to the right and the left, upward and downward.

At this movement, which nobody opposed, he resumed a little courage,
and ventured to draw up one leg and then the other. At length, with the
help of his two hands he lifted himself from the bench, and found
himself on his feet.

At this moment an officer with a pleasant face opened a door, continued
to exchange some words with a person in the next chamber and then came
up to the prisoner. "Is your name Bonacieux?" said he.

"Yes, Monsieur Officer," stammered the mercer, more dead than alive,
"at your service."

"Come in," said the officer.

And he moved out of the way to let the mercer pass. The latter obeyed
without reply, and entered the chamber, where he appeared to be
expected.

It was a large cabinet, close and stifling, with the walls furnished
with arms offensive and defensive, and in which there was already a
fire, although it was scarcely the end of the month of September. A
square table, covered with books and papers, upon which was unrolled an
immense plan of the city of La Rochelle, occupied the center of the
room.

Standing before the chimney was a man of middle height, of a haughty,
proud mien; with piercing eyes, a large brow, and a thin face, which
was made still longer by a _royal_ (or _imperial_, as it is now
called), surmounted by a pair of mustaches. Although this man was
scarcely thirty-six or thirty-seven years of age, hair, mustaches, and
royal, all began to be gray. This man, except a sword, had all the
appearance of a soldier; and his buff boots, still slightly covered
with dust, indicated that he had been on horseback in the course of the
day.

This man was Armand Jean Duplessis, Cardinal de Richelieu; not such as
he is now represented-broken down like an old man, suffering like a
martyr, his body bent, his voice failing, buried in a large armchair as
in an anticipated tomb; no longer living but by the strength of his
genius, and no longer maintaining the struggle with Europe but by the
eternal application of his thoughts-but such as he really was at this
period; that is to say, an active and gallant cavalier, already weak of
body, but sustained by that moral power which made of him one of the
most extraordinary men that ever lived, preparing, after having
supported the Duc de Nevers in his duchy of Mantua, after having taken
Nimes, Castres, and Uzes, to drive the English from the Isle of Re and
lay siege to La Rochelle.

At first sight, nothing denoted the cardinal; and it was impossible for
those who did not know his face to guess in whose presence they were.

The poor mercer remained standing at the door, while the eyes of the
personage we have just described were fixed upon him, and appeared to
wish to penetrate even into the depths of the past.

"Is this that Bonacieux?" asked he, after a moment of silence.

"Yes, monseigneur," replied the officer.

"That's well. Give me those papers, and leave us."

The officer took from the table the papers pointed out, gave them to
him who asked for them, bowed to the ground, and retired.

Bonacieux recognized in these papers his interrogatories of the
Bastille. From time to time the man by the chimney raised his eyes from
the writings, and plunged them like poniards into the heart of the poor
mercer.

At the end of ten minutes of reading and ten seconds of examination,
the cardinal was satisfied.

"That head has never conspired," murmured he, "but it matters not; we
will see."

"You are accused of high treason," said the cardinal, slowly.

"So I have been told already, monseigneur," cried Bonacieux, giving his
interrogator the title he had heard the officer give him, "but I swear
to you that I know nothing about it."

The cardinal repressed a smile.

"You have conspired with your wife, with Madame de Chevreuse, and with
my Lord Duke of Buckingham."

"Indeed, monseigneur," responded the mercer, "I have heard her
pronounce all those names."

"And on what occasion?"

"She said that the Cardinal de Richelieu had drawn the Duke of
Buckingham to Paris to ruin him and to ruin the queen."

"She said that?" cried the cardinal, with violence.

"Yes, monseigneur, but I told her she was wrong to talk about such
things; and that his Eminence was incapable-"

"Hold your tongue! You are stupid," replied the cardinal.

"That's exactly what my wife said, monseigneur."

"Do you know who carried off your wife?"

"No, monseigneur."

"You have suspicions, nevertheless?"

"Yes, monseigneur; but these suspicions appeared to be disagreeable to
Monsieur the Commissary, and I no longer have them."

"Your wife has escaped. Did you know that?"

"No, monseigneur. I learned it since I have been in prison, and that
from the conversation of Monsieur the Commissary-an amiable man."

The cardinal repressed another smile.

"Then you are ignorant of what has become of your wife since her
flight."

"Absolutely, monseigneur; but she has most likely returned to the
Louvre."

"At one o'clock this morning she had not returned."

"My God! What can have become of her, then?"

"We shall know, be assured. Nothing is concealed from the cardinal; the
cardinal knows everything."

"In that case, monseigneur, do you believe the cardinal will be so kind
as to tell me what has become of my wife?"

"Perhaps he may; but you must, in the first place, reveal to the
cardinal all you know of your wife's relations with Madame de
Chevreuse."

"But, monseigneur, I know nothing about them; I have never seen her."

"When you went to fetch your wife from the Louvre, did you always
return directly home?"

"Scarcely ever; she had business to transact with linen drapers, to
whose houses I conducted her."

"And how many were there of these linen drapers?"

"Two, monseigneur."

"And where did they live?"

"One in Rue de Vaugirard, the other Rue de la Harpe."

"Did you go into these houses with her?"

"Never, monseigneur; I waited at the door."

"And what excuse did she give you for entering all alone?"

"She gave me none; she told me to wait, and I waited."

"You are a very complacent husband, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux," said
the cardinal.

"He calls me his dear Monsieur," said the mercer to himself. "_Peste!_
Matters are going all right."

"Should you know those doors again?"

"Yes."

"Do you know the numbers?"

"Yes."

"What are they?"

"No. 25 in the Rue de Vaugirard; 75 in the Rue de la Harpe."

"That's well," said the cardinal.

At these words he took up a silver bell, and rang it; the officer
entered.

"Go," said he, in a subdued voice, "and find Rochefort. Tell him to
come to me immediately, if he has returned."

"The count is here," said the officer, "and requests to speak with your
Eminence instantly."

"Let him come in, then!" said the cardinal, quickly.

The officer sprang out of the apartment with that alacrity which all
the servants of the cardinal displayed in obeying him.

"To your Eminence!" murmured Bonacieux, rolling his eyes round in
astonishment.

Five seconds has scarcely elapsed after the disappearance of the
officer, when the door opened, and a new personage entered.

"It is he!" cried Bonacieux.

"He! What he?" asked the cardinal.

"The man who abducted my wife."

The cardinal rang a second time. The officer reappeared.

"Place this man in the care of his guards again, and let him wait till
I send for him."

"No, monseigneur, no, it is not he!" cried Bonacieux; "no, I was
deceived. This is quite another man, and does not resemble him at all.
Monsieur is, I am sure, an honest man."

"Take away that fool!" said the cardinal.

The officer took Bonacieux by the arm, and led him into the
antechamber, where he found his two guards.
