CHAPTER XXI
CAPTAIN NEMO’S THUNDERBOLT


We looked at the edge of the forest without rising, my hand stopping in
the action of putting it to my mouth, Ned Land’s completing its office.

“Stones do not fall from the sky,” remarked Conseil, “or they would
merit the name aerolites.”

A second stone, carefully aimed, that made a savoury pigeon’s leg fall
from Conseil’s hand, gave still more weight to his observation. We all
three arose, shouldered our guns, and were ready to reply to any
attack.

“Are they apes?” cried Ned Land.

“Very nearly—they are savages.”

“To the boat!” I said, hurrying to the sea.

It was indeed necessary to beat a retreat, for about twenty natives
armed with bows and slings appeared on the skirts of a copse that
masked the horizon to the right, hardly a hundred steps from us.

Our boat was moored about sixty feet from us. The savages approached
us, not running, but making hostile demonstrations. Stones and arrows
fell thickly.

Ned Land had not wished to leave his provisions; and, in spite of his
imminent danger, his pig on one side and kangaroos on the other, he
went tolerably fast. In two minutes we were on the shore. To load the
boat with provisions and arms, to push it out to sea, and ship the
oars, was the work of an instant. We had not gone two cable-lengths,
when a hundred savages, howling and gesticulating, entered the water up
to their waists. I watched to see if their apparition would attract
some men from the _Nautilus_ on to the platform. But no. The enormous
machine, lying off, was absolutely deserted.

Twenty minutes later we were on board. The panels were open. After
making the boat fast, we entered into the interior of the _Nautilus_.

I descended to the drawing-room, from whence I heard some chords.
Captain Nemo was there, bending over his organ, and plunged in a
musical ecstasy.

“Captain!”

He did not hear me.

“Captain!” I said, touching his hand.

He shuddered, and, turning round, said, “Ah! it is you, Professor?
Well, have you had a good hunt, have you botanised successfully?”

“Yes Captain; but we have unfortunately brought a troop of bipeds,
whose vicinity troubles me.”

“What bipeds?”

“Savages.”

“Savages!” he echoed, ironically. “So you are astonished, Professor, at
having set foot on a strange land and finding savages? Savages! where
are there not any? Besides, are they worse than others, these whom you
call savages?”

“But Captain——”

“How many have you counted?”

“A hundred at least.”

“M. Aronnax,” replied Captain Nemo, placing his fingers on the organ
stops, “when all the natives of Papua are assembled on this shore, the
_Nautilus_ will have nothing to fear from their attacks.”

The Captain’s fingers were then running over the keys of the
instrument, and I remarked that he touched only the black keys, which
gave his melodies an essentially Scotch character. Soon he had
forgotten my presence, and had plunged into a reverie that I did not
disturb. I went up again on to the platform: night had already fallen;
for, in this low latitude, the sun sets rapidly and without twilight. I
could only see the island indistinctly; but the numerous fires, lighted
on the beach, showed that the natives did not think of leaving it. I
was alone for several hours, sometimes thinking of the natives—but
without any dread of them, for the imperturbable confidence of the
Captain was catching—sometimes forgetting them to admire the splendours
of the night in the tropics. My remembrances went to France in the
train of those zodiacal stars that would shine in some hours’ time. The
moon shone in the midst of the constellations of the zenith.

The night slipped away without any mischance, the islanders frightened
no doubt at the sight of a monster aground in the bay. The panels were
open, and would have offered an easy access to the interior of the
_Nautilus_.

At six o’clock in the morning of the 8th January I went up on to the
platform. The dawn was breaking. The island soon showed itself through
the dissipating fogs, first the shore, then the summits.

The natives were there, more numerous than on the day before—five or
six hundred perhaps—some of them, profiting by the low water, had come
on to the coral, at less than two cable-lengths from the _Nautilus_. I
distinguished them easily; they were true Papuans, with athletic
figures, men of good race, large high foreheads, large, but not broad
and flat, and white teeth. Their woolly hair, with a reddish tinge,
showed off on their black shining bodies like those of the Nubians.
From the lobes of their ears, cut and distended, hung chaplets of
bones. Most of these savages were naked. Amongst them, I remarked some
women, dressed from the hips to knees in quite a crinoline of herbs,
that sustained a vegetable waistband. Some chiefs had ornamented their
necks with a crescent and collars of glass beads, red and white; nearly
all were armed with bows, arrows, and shields and carried on their
shoulders a sort of net containing those round stones which they cast
from their slings with great skill. One of these chiefs, rather near to
the _Nautilus_, examined it attentively. He was, perhaps, a “mado” of
high rank, for he was draped in a mat of banana-leaves, notched round
the edges, and set off with brilliant colours.

I could easily have knocked down this native, who was within a short
length; but I thought that it was better to wait for real hostile
demonstrations. Between Europeans and savages, it is proper for the
Europeans to parry sharply, not to attack.

During low water the natives roamed about near the _Nautilus_, but were
not troublesome; I heard them frequently repeat the word “Assai,” and
by their gestures I understood that they invited me to go on land, an
invitation that I declined.

So that, on that day, the boat did not push off, to the great
displeasure of Master Land, who could not complete his provisions.

This adroit Canadian employed his time in preparing the viands and meat
that he had brought off the island. As for the savages, they returned
to the shore about eleven o’clock in the morning, as soon as the coral
tops began to disappear under the rising tide; but I saw their numbers
had increased considerably on the shore. Probably they came from the
neighbouring islands, or very likely from Papua. However, I had not
seen a single native canoe. Having nothing better to do, I thought of
dragging these beautiful limpid waters, under which I saw a profusion
of shells, zoophytes, and marine plants. Moreover, it was the last day
that the _Nautilus_ would pass in these parts, if it float in open sea
the next day, according to Captain Nemo’s promise.

I therefore called Conseil, who brought me a little light drag, very
like those for the oyster fishery. Now to work! For two hours we fished
unceasingly, but without bringing up any rarities. The drag was filled
with midas-ears, harps, melames, and particularly the most beautiful
hammers I have ever seen. We also brought up some sea-slugs,
pearl-oysters, and a dozen little turtles that were reserved for the
pantry on board.

But just when I expected it least, I put my hand on a wonder, I might
say a natural deformity, very rarely met with. Conseil was just
dragging, and his net came up filled with divers ordinary shells, when,
all at once, he saw me plunge my arm quickly into the net, to draw out
a shell, and heard me utter a cry.

“What is the matter, sir?” he asked in surprise. “Has master been
bitten?”

“No, my boy; but I would willingly have given a finger for my
discovery.”

“What discovery?”

“This shell,” I said, holding up the object of my triumph.

“It is simply an olive porphyry, genus olive, order of the
pectinibranchidæ, class of gasteropods, sub-class mollusca.”

“Yes, Conseil; but, instead of being rolled from right to left, this
olive turns from left to right.”

“Is it possible?”

“Yes, my boy; it is a left shell.”

Shells are all right-handed, with rare exceptions; and, when by chance
their spiral is left, amateurs are ready to pay their weight in gold.

Conseil and I were absorbed in the contemplation of our treasure, and I
was promising myself to enrich the museum with it, when a stone
unfortunately thrown by a native struck against, and broke, the
precious object in Conseil’s hand. I uttered a cry of despair! Conseil
took up his gun, and aimed at a savage who was poising his sling at ten
yards from him. I would have stopped him, but his blow took effect and
broke the bracelet of amulets which encircled the arm of the savage.
